R0in7    107B? 


tT 


■■:iy.  :!,it.!,',i::',i:,! 


mk 


1 


a 


SaggS 


>       i 


^m 


JOURNAL 

OF   THE 

TEXIAN  EXPEDITION  AGAINST  MIER; 

SUBSEQUENT  IMPRISONMENT  OF  THE  AUTHOR ; 

HIS    SUFFERINGS, 

AND  PINAL 

ESCAPE  FROM  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE. 


REFLECTIONS    UPON    THE    PRESENT    POLITICAL    AND 
PROBABLE    FUTURE    RELATIONS 


arenas,  JHetfcv***  tjte  WLniWn  States. 


•(JEN.   THOMAS   J.  ,  G'RE'EN. 


J  '  *  »  '  .  •- 


ILLUSTRATED   BY   DRAWINGS    TAKEN   FROM    LIFE    BY   CHARLES    MCLAUGHLIN, 
A   FELLOW-PRISONER. 


NE  W-Y  O  RK: 
HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  PUBLISHERS, 

82   CLIFF   STREET. 

1845. 


98053 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1845,  by 

Harper  &  Brothers, 
In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  Southern  District  of  New-York. 


•     « * . 


•-     . « 


.-•-  •■ 


THIS    VOLUME 

IS    RESPECTFULLY    INSCRIBED    TO    THE    FATHER   OF    THE 

TEXAS    REVOLUTION; 

TO    THE    ONE    WHO    FIRST    OF    ALL    STRUCK    FOR    THE    LIBERTY 

OF    HIS    ADOPTED    COUNTRY  ; 

TO    ONE,    THE   LAST    OF    ALL    WHO    WOULD    COMPROMIT    HER 

WELFARE    OR   HONOUR; 

TO    ONE    AS    EXALTED    FOR   HIS    PUBLIC    VIRTUES    AS    ESTIMABLE 

FOR   HIS    PRIVATE    WORTH, 

THE  HONOURABLE  BRANCH  T.  ARCHER; 

BY    ONE    WHO     HAS    KNOWN    HIM    LONG    AND     INTIMATELY    IN 

PRIVATE    LIFE,    AND    WHO,    IN    THE    SAME   CAUSE,    HAS 

MET    HIM    IN    THE    SENATE    AND    THE    CAMP, 

HIS   SINCERE   FRIEND, 

THOMAS  J.  GREEN. 


PREFACE. 


The  Texas  Revolution  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  po- 
litical events  ever  recorded.  A  population  of  twenty  thou- 
sand throwing  off  the  despotic  yoke  of  eight  millions  of 
people  who  claimed  to  be  the  mother  state,  and  nine  years 
successfully  contending  against  such  odds,  with  a  steadily 
increasing  ability  so  to  do,  makes  the  wonder  of  the  achieve- 
ment. Wonderful  as  it  is,  it  is  far  from  being  bloodless. 
Napoleon,  in  twenty  years'  warring  with  nearly  the  whole 
civilized  world,  did  not  lose  half  as  many  men  in  proportion 
to  the  population  of  France  as  has  Texas. 

At  the  repeated  request  of  many  friends  both  in  Texas* 
and  the  United  States,  the  author  offers  to  the  public  the 
following  pages,  in  which  he  has  endeavoured  to  give  a 
faithful  account  of  the  most  important  incident  of  this  san- 
guinary struggle,  about  which  much  has  been  said  by  the 
governments  and  people  belligerant,  as  well  as  by  friendly 
neutral  powers.  In  doing  so,  as  authorship  is  not  his  de- 
sire, he  will  make  no  apology  for  the  manner ;  though, 
should  he  interest  the  reader  with  a  plain  tale,  told  in  a  plain 
way — of  Texian  daring,  of  battles  won  and  lost,  of  dun- 
geons and  old  castles,  of  imprisonment  and  hair-breadth 
escape's,  of  unparalleled  sufferings  and  cruel  murders — he 
will  have  fully  accomplished  the  purpose  of  an  impartial 
record  while  in  a  tyrant's  chains.  If  the  author  has  failed 
in  giving  the  whole  truth,  it  is  in  this,  that  a  too  studied 
regard  for  brevity  has  involved  obscurity.  The  writer's 
position,  also,  in  the  expedition  against  Mier,  and  subse- 
quently as  a  prisoner  of  war  in  Mexico,  placed  him  in 

*  See  Appendix  No.  VII. 


Vlll  PREFACE. 

another  difficulty — that  of  rendering  it  necessary  to  speak 
of  himself.  If  his  conduct  throughout  has  been  praise- 
worthy or  otherwise,  it  would  be  unnatural  to  acknowl- 
edge the  one,  and  immodest  to  avow  the  other. 

If  the  author  has  been  uujust  to  Mexico,  it  is  in  failing  to 
detail  more  at  length  her  vices ;  and  for  fear  that  a  too 
charitable  community  would  ascribe  to  him  personal  vin- 
dictiveness,  and  then  more  charitably  balance  that  account 
with  his  ill  treatment  and  sufferings,  he  has  forborne  in 
many  particulars  to  say  what,  perhaps,  he  should  have  said. 

He  will  assert,  that  what  he  has  said  of  the  general  deg- 
radation of  that  nation,  of  the  wretched  want  and  misery 
of  the  million,  is  far  short  of  the  whole  truth,  as  a  very  late 
writer  upon  that  country  will  bear  witness ;  and  what  he 
has  particularized  no  one  will  question. 

This  journal,  imperfect  as  it  may  be,  has  been  ready 
for  the  press  since  the  writer's  escape  from  the  Castle  of 
Perote,  but  has  been  kept  back  for  fear  of  prejudicing  the 
condition  of  his  countrymen  who  were  detained,  until  re- 
cently, prisoners  of  war  in  Mexico. 

The  designs  accompanying  the  work  were  executed  on 
the  spot  by  Charles  M'Laughlin,  one  of  the  Mier  prisoners, 
who  participated  in  all  the  dangers  and  sufferings  of  this 
eventful  expedition,  and  to  whose  genius  great  credit  is  due 
for  their  faithfulness  to  the  life. 


CONTENTS. 

INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER       .        .    Page  IT 

CHAPTER  II. 

President  Houston's  Conduct  in  the  Campaign. — His  Newspaper  War 
with  President  Santa  Anna. — His  Treatment  of  the  United  States 
Volunteers 22 

CHAPTER  III. 

General  Vascus  plunders  San  Antonio. — The  Texians  to  the  Rescue. — 
General  Burleson  elected  their  Commander. — President  Houston's 
Orders  to  General  Somerville. — His  vacillating  Conduct  in  the  Cam- 
paign.— His  Call  of  the  Congress  and  Veto  of  the  War-bill  .  25 

CHAPTER  IV. 

General  Woll  takes  San  Antonio. — His  Loss. — White  Flag. — Capitula- 
tion of  the  Citizens. — Abduction  of  the  Court. — His  Protection  of  the 
Santa  Fe  Prisoners.— Battle  and  Defeat  by  Colonel  Caldwell  at  Sala- 
do. — Battle  of  the  Musquet. — Death  of  Captain  Dawson. — Butchery 
of  Texians  after  Surrender. — Law  of  Retaliation. — General  Woll  re- 
treats from  San  Antonio. — Murder  of  Dr.  Smithers  and  Companions. 
— Death  of  their  Wounded. — Cause  of  the  Texians  not  charging  him 
at  the  Rio  Hondo. — Traitor  Seguin. — General  Burleson  comes  up  with 
Re-enforcements 29 

chapter  v. 

President  Houston  issues  another  War  Proclamation. — Texians  again  in 
the  Field. — General  Somerville  arrives  in  Camp  and  Disbands  the 
Troops. — Volunteers  Organized.  —  Burleson's  Arrival  at  Camp. — 
Houston's  Refusal  to  issue  him  Orders. — Volunteers  press  forward  to 
San  Antonio. — Somerville's  Arrival. — Montgomery  Troops  Return. — 
Operations  in  Camp  around  Bexar 37 

CHAPTER  VI. 

General  Somerville  marches  upon  Laredo. — Gets  into  a  Bog. — Taking  of 
Laredo. — Neglect  to  Ration  the  Troops. — Camp  moved  in  the  Direction 

B 


X  CONTENTS. 

towards  Home. — Council  of  War. — First  Texian  Flag  planted  west  of 
the  Rio  Grande. — General  Somerville  starts  Home. — Camp  without 
Water. — Much  Discontent. — Another  War  Council. — Speech  from  the 
General. — 200  Troops  return  Home,  and  the  General  marches  with 
those  remaining  against  the  Enemy. — Cross  the  Rio  Grande  near 
Guerrero. — Get  Sight  of  the  Enemy. — Recross  the  Rio  Grande  for 
Home,  and  separate  from  the  Main  Body     ....     Page  52 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Colonel  Fisher  elected  Commander. — The  Writer  appointed  Commander 
of  the  Flotilla. — Descent  of  the  Rio  Grande. — Capture  of  Carancawa 
Indians  with  a  British  Flag. — Occupation  of  Mier. — Requisition  for 
Provision. — Arrest  of  the  Alcalde. — Enemy's  Appearance. — Council  of 
War.— Order  of  Battle ...    70 

CHAPTER  VIII 

BATTLE  OF  MIER         ....     82 

CHAPTER  IX. 

White  Flag. — Dr.  Sinnickson's  Statement. — Cavalry  sent  after  our  Camp- 
guard. — Camp-guard  Escapes. — Major  Bonnel's  Death. — Return  of  Cav- 
alry.— Preparation  to  march  for  Matamoras. — Dr.  Sinnickson  left  in 
Charge  of  our  Wounded. — Their  Treatment  and  Escape. — March  for 
Matamoras. — Suffering  of  our  Men. — Triumphal  Entry  into  Comargo. — 
Camp  in  a  Cow-pen. — The  Bull  Comedy. — Camp  in  a  Sheep-pen. — A 
new  Comedy. — Triumphal  Entry  into  Rhinosa. — Ridiculous  Show. — 
Arrival  at  Guadaloupe. — Congratulations  to  Ampudia. — Visit  of  Tom 
and  Esau. — Triumphal  Entry  into  Matamoras. — Texas  Negroes  in 
Matamoras. — Our  Incarceration  in  Prison,  and  Note  to  General  Am- 
pudia .         .         .    ■ 112 

CHAPTER  X. 

Preparations  for  March  to  Mexico. — Our  Friends  J.  P.  Schatzell,  Marks, 
and  Strother. — Protest  against  ironing  our  Men. — March  for  Monterey 
under  charge  of  Colonel  Savriego. — Held  as  Hostages  for  the  good 
Conduct  of  our  Men. — Interview  with  them  in  Prison. — Arrival  at  Cai- 
dereta. — Bad  Treatment. — Letter  to  Ampudia. — Arrival  at  Monterey. 
— Character  of  Colonel  Savriego. — Quartered  at  Colonel  Bermudez's. 
—His  Character  and  Family. — Interview  with  Governor  Ortega  .  126 


CONTENTS.  XI 

CHAPTER  XL 

March  for  Saltillo. — Our  Treatment. — Meet  Captain  Fitzgerald,  Van 
Ness,  and  others  in  Prison.  —  Their  Condition.  —  Arrival  of  Colonel 
Barragan  with  our  Prisoners. — We  march  for  San  Luis  Potosi. — Arri- 
val at  Salado. — Our  Men  arrive  at  Aqua  Nuevo. — Captain  Dimmit. — 
His  Death. — Barragan  arrives  with  our  Men  at  Salado. — Concerted 
Attack  upon  the  Guards. — The  Charge  and  Victory  at  Salado. — Order 
to  shoot  us. — Narrow  Escape. — Arrival  at  Cidral. — Narrow  Escape 
from  the  Populace. — Narrow  Escape  from  our  new  Guards. — Arrival 
at  Mataguala. — Treatment  there. — Report  of  the  Battle  of  Salado 

Page  140 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Our  Men  take  up  the  March  for  Home. — Departure  from  Plan  of  Retreat 
by  turning  into  the  Mountains. — Unexampled  Suffering. — Killing  their 
Horses  for  Food. — Many  Die,  and  others  Surrender. — Marched  back 
to  Saltillo. — March  to  Salado. — Decimation,  and  dying  Words. — Our 
Wounded,  and  those  who  remained  with  them. — March  from  Matagua- 
la. —  Arrival  at  Count  Zivyes.  —  Kind  Treatment.  —  Arrival  at  San 
Luis  Potosi. — Treatment  there. — Correspondence  with  the  Governor. 
— Notes  to  Captains  Romano  and  Reyes. — The  Valley  of  San  Luis, 
Mode  of  drawing  Water,  &c. 158 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

MARCH  TO  THE  CAPITAL  UNDER  COLONEL  TERRIS. 
Hacienda  de  Plata. — Bad  Treatment. — Xaral,  Marquis  of. — Horses  ta- 
ken from  us. — Made  to  walk  over  the  Mountain. — Our  Remonstrances 
with  the  Colonel. — Billy  Reese  and  the  Catholic  Crosses. — Bugler,  his 
Wife,  and  Sister.— Suffer  for  Water. — Punishment  of  a  Soldier. — Do- 
lores.— Hidalgo. — Calleja. — San  Miguel  el  Grande. — Hacienda  of  the 
Jesuits. — Burned  Hacienda. — Lodged  in  a  Stable. — The  Comet. — Su- 
perstition concerning  it. — Mexicans  meet  Danger  with  a  Prayer. — 
Cruel  Treatment. — Mexican  Officers. — Lasso. — Lice. — Fleas  :  Advan- 
tage of. — Locked  up. — Protest. — Quartered  in  a  Corral. — Villanous 
Conduct  of  the  Colonel. — Valley  of  Mexico. — Arrival  at  Tacubaya.— 
Description  of. — General  Jackson's  Birthday. — Friends  visit  us. — Mr 
Cursin. — Captain  West. — Mr.  Packenham  :  Interview  with  .        .  187 


Xll  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

MARCH  FROM  TACUBAYA  TO  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE. 
Marched  on  Foot. — General  Valencia,  Wife,  and  Daughters. — Our  Re- 
flections.— Hire  Asses. — Pulque-drinking  Officer. — Pass  the  Volcanoes. 
— Germans. — National  Character  of  the  Germans  and  other  Foreigners. 
— Puebla. — Bad  Treatment. — Lieutenant  Velarde. — New  Officer. — 
The  Execution  of  General  Mexier. — Acahita. — The  Death  of  Mexier. 
— Texian  Talent  for  Drawing. — The  Honest  Mexican. — Arrival  at  Pe- 
rote. — Meeting  our  Countrymen  Prisoners   ....  Page  223 

CHAPTER  XV. 

IMPRISONMENT  IN  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE. 
Three  Days'  Grace  before  Ironed. — The  Castle. — Its  Strength. — Pres- 
ident Houston. — Orazabo. — Cofre  de  Perote. — Castle. — Its  Situation. — 
Climate. — Description. — Bexar  Prisoners. — Mexican  Culprits. — Theft. 
— Rape. — Murder. — The  Prisoner  who  killed  a  Priest  for  kissing  his 
Wife. — Prisons  of  the  Mier  Men. — Their  Treatment. — Ironed. — Mode 
of  breaking  off  the  Chains. — Tricking  the  Officers. — Santa  Anna  and 
the  Blacksmith. — "  Can't  come  it,  Judge  !" — Rations. — Ass's  Milk. — 
Our  Mess. — Cooking. — Best  Way  to  make  Coffee. — Ordered  to  Work. 
— Remonstrance  to  Minister  of  War. — To  the  Governor. — To  the  Uni- 
ted States  Minister. — Release  of  Judges  Jones,  Hutchinson,  and  Mav- 
erick.— Treason  of  Robinson  :  our  Denunciation  of. — Anniversary  of 
the  21st  of  April. — Sentiments,  Songs,  Tecolote,  and  Old  Guts    .  236 

CHAPTER  XVI 

IMPRISONMENT  IN  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE.— Continued. 
Our  fat  friend. — Commissariat. — Statement  of  Rations. — Jake  upon  Cow- 
ology. — Snake-bitten  old  Cow. — Guts  in  Caricature. — Old  Limpy :  his 
Character.— Lousing. — Simeon  Glenn. — Louse-racing. — What  is  an  Old 
Soldier  1 — How  to  select  the  Racers. — An  Argument  in  favour  of  Phre- 
nology.— General  Austin  in  the  Accordada. — The  Old  Sailing-master's 
Pipe. — Longing  for  Brandy. — Sutler,  Wife,  and  Daughter. — Shifts  to 
get  Brandy. — Surprise  of  Senorito. — The  Sergeant's  handsome  Wife. — 
Dan  :  his  "Soldier's  Tear." — A  United  States  Midshipman. — How  he 
avoided  Work. — A  Favourite. — "  Long,  long  Ago." — His  Heresy  lost 
him  Favour. — His  intellectual  Improvement. — Mr.  Black,  United  States 
Consul. — Billy  Reese. — Shooting  of  Captain  Ewin  Cameron. — Remin- 
iscence of  Captain  Cameron. — George  B.  Crittenden. — 0.  Phelps. — 
Letter  to  President  Tyler. — Letters  from  United  States. — Letter  to  Mr. 
Calhoun. — Preparation  for  Emigration  to  Texas    ....  262 


CONTENTS.  Xlll 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

ESCAPE  FROM  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE. 
Preparation  to  Escape. — Procuring  a  Map  of  the  Road. — Deceiving  the 
Officer  with  Shaving  Tools. — Work  upon  Breach  in  the  Wall. — Letter 
to  our  Prisoners  in  Mexico. — Santa  Anna's  Birthday. — President  Hous- 
ton's Orders  to  Colonel  Snively  prevents  our  Liberation. — Commodore 
Moore  off  Campeachy. — Prosecution  of  the  Breach  in  the  Wall. — Lay- 
ing in  Provisions  to  Travel. — Last  Visit  to  "  Guts." — Quarterlero. — 
Voos,  his  Rheumatism,  and  Grunts. — All  decline  the  Escape  but  Six- 
teen.— Left  Papers  with  Colquhoun. — Note  to  Santa  Anna. — Take 
Leave  of  our  Friends. — Turnkeys. — Mode  of  Counting. — Locking  up. — 
Deceiving  the  Sentinels  :  mode  of. — Monte  Bank. — Bull-dance. — Com- 
mence going  Out. —  Toowig. —  Ike  Allen  :  his  Fall. —  Character. — 
Beeve's  Bladder. —  Aguardiente. — Governor. —  "Guts"  and  the  Dia- 
logue.— Stone  hung  in  the  Hole. — The  Herculean  John  Young. — 
Passing  the  Sentinels. — Their  Hailing. — Our  Response        .  Page  296 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

RESIDENCE  IN  THE  MOUNTAINS,  AND  ENTRY  INTO  JALAPA. 

Two  hundred  Yards  east  of  the  Castle. — Separation. — Parting  Speeches. 
— Pass  the  Powder-house. — Meet  with  Reese  and  Toowig. — Divide 
Rations  with. — Take  to  the  Mountains. — Residence  and  Sufferings  in. 
— Return  to  the  Valley. — Charge  of  Cavalry  and  Escape. — Separation 
from  Toowig. — Narrow  Escape  from  a  Precipice. — Make  Coffee. — Ap- 
proach to  Jalapa. — Our  Distress  from  Sore  Feet  and  Thorns. — Entry 
and  Peregrination  in  the  City. — Our  Location  in  the  Suburbs. — Re- 
entry, mode  of. — Don  :  his  Wife,  and  warm  Supper. — Meet  Toowig. 
— Residence  in  City. — Kind  Treatment. — Robbers  employed,  and  we 
delivered  over  to  them  in  a  dark  Hollow 326 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

FIVE  NIGHTS'  JOURNEY  TO  VERA  CRUZ  UNDER  CONDUCT 
OF  ROBBERS. 

Head  Robber. — Coming  to  the  Horses. — Signal. — Silence. — Winding 
around  Precipices. — Narrow  Paths. — Sure-footed  Animals. — Puente 
Nacional. — Rio  Antigua. — Lying  in  Swamp. — Hot  Breakfast. — Lodg- 
ed in  vacant  House. — Gray-bearded  old  Man. — Meeting  Robbers. — 
Enter  Antigua. — Cavalry  Officer  and  the  Gray-bearded  old  Man. — 
Narrow  Escape  from  the  Officers  and  Guards.— Crossing  the  Ferry, 
and  deceiving  the  Officer.— The  Gray-bearded  old  Man's  Exultation. — 


98053 


XIV  CONTENTS. 

Taking  the  Road  to  Mango  de  Clavo. — Secreted  for  the  Night. — Head 
Robber  goes  into  Vera  Cruz. — Our  Location  next  Day. — Vessels  at 
Sea. — Sand  Storm. — Head  Robber  arrives  with  Don  E. — Start  for  the 
City. — Storm  and  Separation. — ■Arrival  near  the  City  Gates. — Suspi- 
cions of  the  Head  Robber. — Bad  Night. — Don  E.  finds  us  next  Day. — 
Our  Entry  into  the  City. — Parting  with  Robbers. — Valedictory  of  the 
Gray-bearded  old  Man. — Our  Hiding-place. — United  States  Friends. — 
Dick  Barclay. — Recapture  of  our  Comrades. — A  Look  into  the  Castle 
after  the  Denouement. — Surprise,  Wonder,  and  Astonishment. — The 
Governor,  Guts,  and  the  Children Page  343 

CHAPTER  XX. 

EMBARCATION  AT  VERA  CRUZ  FOR  HOME. 
Preparation  for  Embarcation. — Captain  Loyd  and  Steamer  Petrita. — Pass 
Officers  on  the  Mole. — Sup  on  board  a  U.  S.  Vessel. — Hailed  by  War 
Steamers. — Board  the  Petrita. — Meet  my  Companions  and  Dr.  Sinnick- 
son. — Mexican  Officers  come  on  board. — My  Berth  under  the  Boilers  : 
its  Temperature. — Dialogue  with  Steward. — Passage  and  Arrival  in 
New-Orleans. — Once  more  in  the  Land  of  Liberty. — "Tom  and  Jer- 
ry," "  Hail  Storm,"  and  "  Sherry  Cobbler." — St.  Charles  Hotel  and  a 
Soft  Bed. — Sail  for  the  "  Lone  Star." — Land  at  Velasco. — Reese  and 
Dan. — Our  Remaining  Countrymen  in  Mexico.  —  Their  Destitution, 
Sufferings,  and  Deaths. — The  Cause,  and  Treasonable  Armistice  with 
Mexico 364 

SUPPLEMENTAL  CHAPTER. 

Reflections  upon  the  Present  Political  and  probable  Future  Relations  of 
Texas,  Mexico,  and  the  United  States. — Annexation. — Abolition. — 
Southern  Boundary 382 

Appendices  I.  to  IX.  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .    437-487 


LIST    OF    ENGRAVINGS. 


Page 

1  Mier  Expedition  descending  the  Rio  Grande  .        .        .71 

2  Battle  of  Mier 82 

3  Texian  Charge  upon  the  Guards,  and  Victory  of  Salado       .        .155 

4  Texians  killing  their  Horses  in  the  Mountains  for  Sustenance     .  161 

5  Texians  drawing  the  black  Beans  at  Solado         .        .        .        .170 

6  Shooting  of  the  decimated  Texians  at  Solado  .        .        .173 

7  Ground-plan  of  the  Castle  of  Perote    .        .        .        .        .        .239 

8  Shooting  of  Captain  Ewin  Cameron     ......  285 

9  Guts  and  Ike  Allen  at  the  Calaboose  ......  324 

10  Escape  from  the  Castle  of  Perote 325 

11  Separation  after  Escape       ........  328 

12  Narrow  Escape  from  the  Cavalry  Officer  at  Antigua    .        .        .  350 

13  Texians  working  upon  the  Road  in  front  of  the  Archbishop's  Pal- 

ace at  Tacubaya     .........  370 


JOURNAL. 


INTRODUCTORY  CHAPTER. 

The  election  of  General  Sam.  Houston,  in  1836, 
as  first  constitutional  president,  over  Stephen  F. 
Austin,  the  father  of  his  country,  did  not  show  less 
confidence  in  the  virtues  and  capability  of  that  de- 
ceased patriot.  In  casting  their  votes  between  these 
distinguished  individuals,  a  majority  of  the  electors 
of  Texas  voted  for  the  former,  believing  that,  from 
his  military  reputation,  he  would  pursue  an  active 
belligerant  policy,  which,  at  a  short  period,  would 
extort  an  honourable  peace  from  our  enemy.  They 
feared  in  General  Austin  a  more  temporizing  and 
pacific  course,  which  they  believed  less  calculated  to 
procure  the  peace  they  so  much  desired.  Whether 
these  were  just  grounds  of  apprehension  as  to  the 
policy  of  that  wise  and  good  man,  must  to  some  ex- 
tent remain  a  secret ;  but  in  frequent  conversations 
with  the  author  subsequent  to  the  election,  he  evin- 
ced a  desire  to  give  Mexico  a  reasonable  opportu- 
nity of  settling  the  dispute  without  farther  recourse 
to  arms,  and,  in  the  event  of  failure,  to  use  the  most 
energetic  means  to  coerce  it. 

Not  so  with  General  Houston.     He  was  elected 

C 


18  INTRODUCTION. 

as  the  war  candidate ;  for  the  nation  believed  that 
a  war  policy  would  procure  us  a  speedy  peace.  In 
this  they  were  disappointed ;  for  General  Houston's 
first  official  act  was  a  visit  to  the  captive  president 
of  Mexico,  then  confined  at  Orozimbo.  This  art- 
ful tyrant  had  the  address  to  make  him  believe  that, 
if  he,  Santa  Anna,  could  see  Houston's  old  friend, 
President  Andrew  Jackson,  at  Washington  City, 
they  would  complete  the  treaty  which  he  so  solemn- 
ly promised  the  Texians.  President  Houston  then, 
in  violation  of  the  expressed  will  of  the  Congress, 
at  that  time  in  session,  smuggled  him  out  of  the 
country. 

When  Santa  Anna  was  once  out  of  Texas,  he 
laughed  at  his  promise  to  Houston  as  neither  legal- 
ly nor  morally  binding  upon  him ;  and,  though  he 
made  those  promises  with  all  the  sanctity  of  deep 
contrition,  and  heartfelt  interest  for  our  young  na- 
tion, yet  the  whole  civilized  world  justified  him  in 
their  breach,  and  wondered  at  the  credulity  of  our 
Executive  in  believing  that  such  a  promise  was  in 
any  way  binding. 

In  full  view,  which  this  farce  brought  upon  us  as 
a  nation,  President  Houston  persisted  in  his  "  peace 
policy,"  and  his  next  step  was  the  disbandment  of 
the  best-appointed  army  Texas  ever  had  in  the 
field,  and  a  total  neglect  of  the  law  of  Congress  or- 
dering him  to  build  two  steamers,  one  sloop  of  war, 
and  two  schooners.  Thus  ended  President  Hous- 
ton's first  administration,  with  offence  enough  to 


INTRODUCTION.  19 

vex  the  enemy,  and  not  energy  enough  to  make  him 
respect  us ;  and  it  closed  with  a  universal  national 
conviction  that  a  different  policy  was  necessary. 
That  national  conviction  called  to  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  government  General  Mirabeau  B.  La- 
mar, a  gentleman  whose  gallant  bearing  at  San  Ja- 
cinto, and  general  chivalry  of  character,  was  a  sure 
guaranty  that  in  him  it  would  be  fully  carried  out 
President  Lamar  did  more  towards  carrying  it 
out.  He  built  the  navy,  and  maintained  the  mas- 
tery of  the  Gulf;  he  beat  back  the  Indians  and  ex- 
tended the  frontier ;  but,  unfortunately  for  the  na- 
tion, his  administration  closed  without  that  bold  and 
energetic  strike  upon  our  Mexican  enemy  which 
would  at  that  time  have  given  us  peace.  This  war 
policy  was  advocated  by  the  Hon.  Branch  T. 
Archer,  then  Secretary  of  War  and  Navy,  and  sus- 
tained by  Vice-president  Burnet,  the  Hon.  James 
Webb,  attorney-general,  Major-general  Felix  Hu- 
sten,  and  other  distinguished  individuals.  Thus 
closed  the  sixth  year  of  this  quasi  war,  which  had 
involved  the  nation  in  heavy  debt,  depreciated  to 
a  fearful  extent  the  value  of  individual  property, 
and  by  the  ravenous  operations  of  the  courts,  sher- 
iffs, and  constables,  had  brought  misery  and  distress 
into  the  bosom  of  many  a  good  family.  An  infatu- 
ation seemed  to  possess  the  land  injurious  as  it  was 
lasting.  Most  men  seemed  to  think,  when  not  in 
the  immediate  sight  of  the  Mexicans,  that  the  war 
was  at  an  end.     The  dockets  of  the  courts  were 


20  INTRODUCTION. 

crowded  with  foreign  claimants  in  the  absence  of 
all  treaty  authority  upon  the  subject,  and  vast 
amounts  of  property  changed  hands  from  those  who 
had  won  and  were  still  willing  to  fight  for  the  coun- 
try, to  those  who  never  drew  a  blade  or  contributed 
a  dollar  in  the  war.  By  thus  acting,  as  though  the 
war  did  not  really  exist,  the  chief  government  of 
the  country  was  the  government  of  the  courts ;  not 
one  of  protection,  but,  under  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances of  the  times,  of  destruction  to  the  many ; 
because  the  establishment  of  this  branch  of  the  gov- 
ernment, which  presupposed  a  close  of  the  revolu- 
tion and  a  final  accomplishment  of  our  liberty,  was 
premature.  The  people  of  Texas  were  still  in  the 
midst  of  revolution ;  a  revolution  which  prevented 
men  of  capital  from  other  countries  making  invest- 
ments in  ours. 

There  is  nothing  more  true,  that  in  their  distress, 
political  communities,  like  individuals,  will  frequent- 
ly ascribe  their  calamities  to  wrong  causes ;  and 
President  Lamar's  administration  closed  with  much 
complaint  of  him  as  the  cause  of  the  then  individual 
and  national  suffering.  If  this  complaint  had  any 
foundation  in  justice,  it  was  his  neglect  to  procure 
for  Texas  a  mild  peace  by  the  prosecution  of  a  bold 
war.*    Every  sensible  man  must  now  believe  that  a 

*  Upon  the  authority  of  some  of  President  Lamar's  confidential 
friends,  it  is  due  to  him  to  state,  that  the  cause  of  his  not  prosecuting 
offensive  measures  against  Mexico  was  the  expectation  of  his  procuring 
"  a  five  million  loan"  in  Europe,  which  he  intended  to  expend  by  waging 


INTRODUCTION.  21 

bold  war  would  have  procured  such  a  peace ;  that 
peace  would  have  brought  us  emigration,  and  that 
emigration  would  have  brought  us  money.  In  the 
proneness  of  the  public  mind  to  visit  all  the  wrongs 
upon  the  President,  men  did  not  look  to  that  uni- 
versal commercial  and  pecuniary  distress  which  had 
swept  through  all  Christendom :  they  could  not 
believe  that  a  distress  even  greater  than  theirs  ex- 
isted in  other  countries.  The  people  of  Texas  a 
third  time  went  to  the  polls,  and  in  their  then  indi- 
vidual and  political  sufferings  they  forgot  the  errors 
and  wrongs  of  President  Houston's  former  admin- 
istration, and  elected  him  over  David  G.  Burnet, 
one  alike  eminent  for  his  learning  and  patriotism ; 
too  honest  to  indulge  in  the  trickery  of  the  dema- 
gogue, and  too  proud  to  pander  to  the  vitiated  ap- 
petites of  the  corrupt. 

President  Houston,  unlike  his  predecessor  Lamar, 
who,  in  ah  his  public  -documents,  defended  the  hon- 
our and.  dignity  of  his  country,  commenced  his  sec- 
ond .term  by  exposing  to  his  enemies  and  the  world 
his  iwS&'kness,  by  unnecessarily-  magnifying  that 
weakness,;. by  his: repudiating  doctrines  of  public 
faith,  by  his  laying  violent  hands  upon  the  public 
archives,  by  his  secret  orders  to  commence  civil 
war  upon  a  portion  of  the  citizens  of  Texas,  who 
opposed  his  violent  and  unlawful  measures  to  re- 
move the  seat  of  government,  and  by  his  advocacy 

an  offensive  war  against  that  country.  It  is  certain  that  he  was  fre- 
quently nattered  with  the  expectation  of  procuring  said  loan. 


22  HOUSTON  S    CONDUCT. 

of  the  traitor  Seguin,  who  at  that  time  was  leading 
upon  the  heart  of  our  country  a  portion  of  the  Mex- 
ican army;  and  here  commences  the  history  of  the 
campaign  which  we  propose  faithfully  to  record. 


CHAPTER  II. 

President  Houston's  Conduct  in  the  Campaign. — His  Newspaper  War 
with  President  Santa  Anna. — His  Treatment  of  the  United  States 
Volunteers. 

President  Houston's  second  administration,  af- 
ter the  foregoing  catalogue  as  its  precursor,  com- 
menced with  his  old  siren  song  of  peace,  peace  by 
begging,  peace  by  negotiation.  To  some  he  would 
say,  with  a  mock  gravity  of  face  and  tone  which 
would  better  suit  a  father  confessor,.."  In  thirty  days 
you  shall  have  peace  f;;  that;  hOr  was.;  "-fixing  the 
thing."  This  mockery  was  of  short  duration.  In 
rapid  succession7  fallowed  Santa  Anna's  letter; of 
ridicule  of  "  Mr.  Samuel; -Houston"  and\  lf&ec?jrebel 
adventurers ;"  then  General  Arista's,  proclamation  to 
the  people  of  Texas ;  then  General  Vascus's  cap- 
ture and  plunder  of  San  Antonio.  How  were  these 
insults  and  outrages  answered  by  President  Hous- 
ton 1  Was  it  in  the  manly  language  of  the  cannon  1 
To  the  shame  of  our  country,  we  are  bound  to  an- 
swer No  !  How  then  ?  In  the  columns  of  a  vil- 
lage newspaper  our  president  belched  forth  his  gall 


NEWSPAPER    WAR.  23 

and  thunder  upon  the  head  of  the  tyrant  of  Mexico, 
whom  he,  Houston,  "  has  so  greatly  served  while  in 
Texas."*  In  this  newspaper  war  was  our  President 
victor  to  the  extent  of  several  columns  over  and 
above  the  length  of  his  competitor,  and  after  luxu- 
riating under  the  gilded  domes  of  the  Montezumas, 
he  insults  a  nation  with  whom  we  were  at  peace 
by  "  unfurling  the  single  star  upon  the  Isthmus  of 
Darien" 

In  this  tournament  of  the  goose-quill  between  the 
Presidents  of  Mexico  and  Texas,  the  partisan 
Mends  of  the  latter  had  but  little  time  to  chuckle 
over  his  victory.  Santa  Anna  was  not  disposed  to 
await  the  execution  of  his  empty  threat.  He  sends 
General  Vascus  into  San  Antonio,  plunders  that 
place  of  immense  booty,  and  carries  off  our  peace- 
able citizens.  Was  this  outrage  answered  by  the 
national  ordnance  which  the  people  had  placed  in 
the  hands  of  their  President-general-in-chief?  No  ! 
It  was  answered  in  the  numerous  war-speeches  with 
which  he  lulled  and  cajoled  the  citizens  of  Houston 
and  Galveston.  These  cities,  ever  devoted  in  their 
duty  to  their  country,  felt  that  enthusiastic  patriot- 
ism which  pervaded  all  portions  of  Texas.  They 
called  upon  their  President  to  avenge  their  coun- 
try's wrongs.  He  says,  in  a  public  speech,  "  You 
shall  have  war,  and  war  to  the  knife.  I  say  it — 
Sam  Houston  says  it — and  no  man  can  ever  say 

*  See  Santa  Anna's  letter  to  General  Hamilton,  and  Houston's  an- 
swer. 


24  WAR    SPEECHES. 

these  lips  ever  uttered  falsehood."  In  the  speech 
alluded  to,  on  the  21st  of  April,  at  the  Tremont 
House  in  Galveston,  he  says,  "  Before  July  you 
shall  have  war."  He  authorizes  the  enlistment  of 
several  hundred  gallant  young  men  in  the  United 
States,  and,  upon  their  arrival  on  our  shores,  he 
sends  them  to  summer  it  upon  the  Nueces,  unpro- 
vided with  food  or  the  necessary  equipments  of  an 
army,  exposed  to  the  sudden  attack  of  a  superior 
force,  and  the  pestilence  of  a  climate  to  which  they 
were  unused.  These  brave  men  were  for  months 
exposed  to  disease  and  death,  placed  in  a  situation 
where  they  could  not  be  succoured,  nor  any  means 
taken  to  re-enforce  them. 

After  the  President  had  succeeded  in  lulling  the 
popular  war-fever,  which  abated  with  the  retirement 
of  General  Vascus  from  the  country,  he  folds  his 
arms  and  quietly  predicts  that  "  there  must  be  an- 
other Fannin  massacre  before  the  people  would 
come  to  their  senses."  If  this  did  not  take  place  it 
was  no  fault  of  the  President,  and  in  his  prediction 
he  over-estimated  the  bravery  of  the  enemy,  though 
that  enemy  was  by  him  furnished  with  every  in- 
ducement to  execute  his  fell  prediction.  For  the 
credit  of  our  country,  the  following  admissions  we 
record  with  deep  feelings  of  regret  and  mortifica- 
tion. These  patriotic  men,  after  suffering  all  that 
human  nature  was  capable,  returned  to  their  homes, 
beggared,  unpitied,  and  with  the  denunciations  of 
our  President.     Their  good  sense  will  teach  them 


PLUNDER  OF  SAN  ANTONIO.  25 

that,  though  President  Houston  is  the  organ  of  the 
executive  government  of  Texas,  yet  he  is  not  the 
representative  of  the  moral  sentiment  of  the  com- 
munity ;  and  ttiat,  while  every  good  man  in  Texas 
sympathized  in  their  wrongs,  they  will  never  cease 
to  feel  grateful  for  their  heroic  services. 


CHAPTER  III. 

General  Vascus  plunders  San  Antonio. — The  Texians  to  the  Rescue. — 
General  Burleson  elected  their  Commander. — President  Houston's 
Orders  to  General  Somerville. — His  vacillating  Conduct  in  the  Cam- 
paign.— His  Call  of  the  Congress  and  Veto  of  the  War-bill. 

The  plunder  of  San  Antonio  by  General  Vascus, 
on  the  6th  of  March,  1842,  met  a  response  in  the 
bosom  of  every  patriot  Texian :  not  in  the  windy 
gasconade  of  their  President  chief,  but  in  that  pa- 
triotic impulse  which,  before  the  1st  day  of  April, 
had  carried  5000  Texians  to  the  rescue,  a  large 
portion  of  whom  stopped  upon  the  Colorado.  A 
large  number  had  already  assembled  under  their 
veteran  leader,  General  Edward  Burleson,  always 
the  first  in  the  field  and  foremost  in  the  fight.  The 
enemy  fled  before  them  to  the  Rio  Grande,  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles  distant.  The  Texians  were 
anxious  to  pursue,  having  by  the  law  of  the  land 
elected  General  Burleson  their  leader.  President 
Houston,  knowing  that,  if  he  attempted  to  exercise 

D 


26  A   FRUITLESS    CAMPAIGN. 

the  appointing  power  over  them  it  would  break  up 
the  expedition,  sent  General  Somerville  to  take  com- 
mand. This  dissatisfied  nearly  the  whole  camp, 
and  General  Somerville  promised  to  retire  and  leave 
General  Burleson  in  command.  This  he  did,  and, 
having  returned  one  day's  journey  homeward,  learn- 
ing that  some  letters  had  gone  on  to  him  from  Pres- 
ident Houston,  he  returned  to  San  Antonio,  when 
General  Burleson,  determined  not  to  be  the  means 
of  thwarting  the  legal  orders  of  the  government,  re- 
tired, and  left  the  command  to  Somerville  ;  most  of 
the  citizen  soldiers  also  retired,  and  left  General 
Somerville  in  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  the  hospitali- 
ties of  Bexar. 

The  citizens  of  the  western  counties  determined 
to  go  home  and  prepare  themselves  better  for  a 
campaign  the  following  June,  calling  upon  their  old 
and  favourite  leader  Burleson  to  head  them,  which 
he  promised  with  the  approbation  of  the  President, 
and  despatched  the  author  hereof  to  the  President 
for  permission  so  to  do,  which  they  promised  should 
not  cost  the  government  one  dollar.  The  Presi- 
dent withheld  his  permission ;  and  this  campaign 
terminated  with  the  President  ordering  Captain 
Hays  to  raise  a  ranging  company  for  the  protection 
of  the  Western  frontier.  Captain  Hays,  with  but 
his  small  means,  had  so  little  success  in  so  doing, 
that  General  Woll,  in  September  following,  abso- 
lutely entered  and  took  possession  of  San  Antonio 
without  his  knowledge.    During  this  time,  while  all 


DUPLICITY    OF    HOUSTON.  27 

was  excitement  in  favour  of  the  war,  President 
Houston  joined  in  the  cry  with  as  much  seeming 
patriotism  as  the  foremost.  His  Brutum  Fuhnen  to 
Santa  Anna,  his  war  proclamation,  his  address  to 
the  people  of  Texas,  dated  Houston,  April  14th, 
1842,  published  in  the  Telegraph  of  the  20th  of 
June,  his  numerous  and  less  destructive  thunder- 
bolts by  way  of  grog-shop  harangues,  followed 
each  other  in  such  rapid  succession,  that  many  be- 
lieved him  serious  in  his  professions.  His  partisans 
said  that  "  he  had  his  own  plan  of  conducting  the 
campaign ;  let  him  alone,  and  he  would  do  it  right ;' 
that  "  if  the  old  chief  himself  could  head  the  army  in 
person,  then  every  defect  in  its  organization  would 
be  remedied,  and  Mexico  demolished !" 

Under  this  state  of  things  the  President  convoked 
the  Congress  at  the  city  of  Houston,  to  obtain,  as  it 
was  alleged,  more  ample  means  to  prosecute  the  war. 
The  Congress  convened,  bringing  with  them  the 
general  feelings  of  their  constituents,  that  "  the  war 
must  be  ended  by  manly  and  energetic  measures." 
His  adherents  were  for  uniting  in  his  person,  in  vio- 
lation of  the  constitution  and  genius  of  our  govern- 
ment, the  sword  and  the  purse.  The  opposition,  al- 
though they  had  no  confidence  in  him  as  a  military 
leader,  and  believed  that  such  grant  of  power  was 
wholly  in  contravention  of  every  principle  of  the 
government,  voted  him  this  extraordinary  authority. 
They  believed  that  the  great  public  necessity  of 
peace  was  paramount  to  all  other  considerations ; 


28  Houston's  veto. 

that  a  campaign  upon  the  enemy's  country  would 
produce  such  peace,  and  that,  no  matter  under 
whom  it  might  be  commenced,  there  was  enough 
bravery  and  military  intelligence  among  our  people 
to  prosecute  it  to  certain  victory.  President  Hous- 
ton greatly  overreached  himself.  He  doubtless  be- 
lieved that  the  Congress  would  not  give  what  his 
friends  asked,  and  thereby  he  could  defend  himself 
from  the  non-prosecution  of  the  war  by  saying  that 
the  Congress  had  tied  his  hands.  After  the  Con- 
gress granted  all  and  more  than  was  asked,  he 
comes  out  with  his  famous  veto  upon  the  war-bill, 
carps  loudly  upon  the  anti-republicanism  of  placing 
too  much  power  in  the  hands  of  one  individual; 
and,  to  the  lasting  disgrace  of  the  office  he  occu- 
pied, published  to  our  enemies  and  the  world,  in 
the  aforesaid  veto,  thirty-six  times,  that  the  coun- 
try had  "  no  means'1  of  prosecuting  the  war.  We 
will  hereafter  show  with  how  little  truth  this  pleas- 
ing intelligence  was  communicated  to  the  enemy. 
He  at  the  same  time  despatched  General  M.  Hunt 
as  inspector-general  to  organize  the  militia,  and 
muster  into  the  service  several  thousand  troops, 
thus  pretending  that  he  had  a  "  plan." 


CAPTURE    OF    SAN    ANTONIO.  29 


CHAPTER  IV. 

General  Woll  takes  San  Antonio. — His  Loss. — White  Flag. — Capitula- 
tion of  the  Citizens. — Abduction  of  the  Court. — His  Protection  of  the 
Santa  Fe  Prisoners. — Battle  and  Defeat  by  Colonel  Caldwell  at  Sala- 
do. — Battle  of  the  Musquet. — Death  of  Captain  Dawson. — Butchery 
of  Texians  after  Surrender. — Law  of  Retaliation. — General  Woll  re- 
treats from  San  Antonio. — Murder  of  Dr.  Smithers  and  Companions. 
— Death  of  their  Wounded. — Cause  of  the  Texians  not  charging  him 
at  the  Rio  Hondo. — Traitor  Seguin.— General  Burleson  comes  up  with 
Re-enforcements. 

President  Santa  Anna,  in  contempt  of  all  Pres- 
ident Houston's  vain  boasts,  again  ordered  the  in- 
vasion of  Texas,  and  General  Woll  took  possession 
of  San  Antonio  on  the  11th  September,  after  a  de- 
termined resistance  on  the  part  of  the  Anglo-Amer- 
ican portion  of  the  population,  numbering  fifty-three 
men.  The  Mexican  army  under  Woll  entered  the 
town  about  daylight,  and  was  received  by  a  warm 
fire  from  the  Texians,  which  killed  twelve  and 
wounded  twenty-nine  of  the  enemy,  and  with  them 
General  Woll's  favourite  horse. 

Although  the  Mexicans  numbered  twelve  hun- 
dred, and  well  knew  the  strength  of  the  Texians, 
they  did  not  venture  upon  a  farther  attack,  but  had 
recourse  to  their  old  deception.  They  took  one  of 
the  small  boys  of  the  town,  and  sent  him  in  with  a 
white  flag,  sounding  a  parley  at  the  same  time. 
The  Texians  sent  over  Dr.  Booker,  Mr.  Van  Ness, 
and  Captain  Ogden,  to  meet  General  Woll  and  hear 
his  terms.     They  surrendered  upon  the  following 


30  PROTECTION    OF    SANTA    Fe    PRISONERS. 

terms,  that  "they  should  be  treated  with  all  the 
honour  and  consideration  of  prisoners  of  war,  and 
that  all  the  Santa  Fe  prisoners  with  them  should 
be  so  likewise  treated."  Thus  General  Woll  cap- 
tured judge,  jury,  clerks,  lawyers,  and  citizens,  while 
in  the  peaceable  pursuit  of  their  daily  avocations. 
The  loss  of  the  Texians  was  not  one  killed  or 
wounded,  and  the  only  damage  done  by  the  Mexi- 
cans was  killing  a  chicken  rooster  near  the  position 
of  our  men. 

General  Woll  pledged  his  word  and  honour  as 
an  officer,  a  gentleman,  and  a  Frenchman,  for  the 
faithful  observance  of  these  promises,  and  it  affords 
me  pleasure  to  record  the  fact  that  he  exerted  him- 
self in  carrying  them  out.  His  conduct  in  the  case 
of  Captain  Fitzgerald,  Van  Ness,  and  Hancock, 
Santa  Fe  prisoners,  when  they  were  left  at  San 
Fernandez,  by  order  of  the  government,  to  be  shot, 
was  highly  praiseworthy.  He  wrote  to  the  govern- 
ment, if  the  order  was  persisted  in,  that  it  must  also 
accept  his  resignation  in  the  army,  and  thus  these 
men  were  saved. 

But  to  return  to  General  Woll  at  San  Anto- 
nio. He  delayed  his  stay  in  that  city  until  the 
16th,  by  which  time  Colonel  Matthew  Caldwell 
(Old  Paint)  had  assembled  two  hundred  and  ten 
men  in  the  Salado  bottom,  about  six  miles  east 
of  the  city,  in  a  well-selected  position.  Colonel 
Caldwell  then  despatched  Captain  Hays,  with  his 
mounted  company,  to  the  city,  to  draw  out  the 


BATTLE    AT    SALADO.  31 

enemy.  He  approached  near  to  the  Alamo,  when 
the  enemy's  cavalry,  several  hundred,  advanced  upon 
him.  As  directed,  he  fell  back  upon  Caldwell's  po- 
sition, where  the  Texians  lay  in  eager  expectation 
to  receive  the  enemy.  They  were  not  long  kept 
in  suspense.  General  Woll,  with  the  vanity  pecu- 
liar to  his  adopted  country,  said  "he  would  go  in 
person  and  drive  the  Texian  wolves  from  the  bush- 
es." He  accordingly  marched  with  nearly  his 
whole  force,  including  a  large  number  of  the  resi- 
dent Mexicans  of  Bexar,  and  attacked  Caldwell's 
position.  He  used  every  persuasion  to  make  his 
men  charge  the  Texians,  but  to  no  purpose.  The 
Texian  rifle,  when  directed  by  steady  nerves,  as  in 
this  case,  was  awfully  destructive.  In  the  attack 
upon  the  Texians,  the  Mexicans  had  sixty  killed 
and  many  more  wounded,  while  of  the  Texians 
there  were  only  one  killed  and  nine  wounded :  the 
one  killed  being  a  man  by  the  name  of  Jet,  living 
near  San  Antonio,  and  who  was  remarkable  for  his 
cool  daring  both  in  Indian  and  Mexican  fighting. 

General  Woll,  sorely  disappointed  in  driving  the 
"  Texian  wolves  from  the  bush"  was  about  retreat- 
ing, when  he  was  informed  that  a  company  of  Tex- 
ians were  advancing  upon  his  rear,  some  two  miles 
distant.  This  company  proved  to  be  the  gallant 
and  lamented  Captain  Dawson  and  his  company  of 
fifty-three  men,  mostly  from  Fayette  county,  who 
had  determined  upon  succouring  Caldwell ;  and  it 
proved  a  favourable  opportunity  for  General  Woll 


32  BATTLE    OF    THE    MUSQUET. 

to  withdraw  from  Caldwell  without  the  appear- 
ance of  flight ;  consequently,  he  retreated  to  some 
distance,  and  despatched  a  large  portion  of  his  force 
to  attack  Dawson. 

Dawson  selected  his  position  in  a  musquet  thick- 
et favourable  for  his  rifle-shooting,  and  where  he 
could  have  whipped  a  much  superior  force  of  Mex- 
icans with  small  arms ;  but,  to  his  surprise,  after  the 
first  fire  from  his  party,  at  which  several  Mexicans 
fell,  their  whole  force  withdrew  to  a  distance  be- 
yond the  reach  of  the  rifle,  and  opened  upon  the 
Texians  with  a  fieldpiece.  The  Texians  were 
entirely  exposed  to  the  fire  from  the  enemy's  can- 
non, being  in  a  smooth  prairie,  only  partially  pro- 
tected by  small  musquet  timbers,  not  sufficiently 
large  to  shield  them  from  the  cannon-shot.  Thus 
situated,  with  already  a  loss  of  some  eight  or  ten  of 
their  number,  with  many  of  their  horses  either  kill- 
ed, wounded,  or  otherwise  broken  loose  from  their 
charge,  they  found  no  means  left  of  retreating ;  a 
surrender  was  therefore  determined  upon.  Here 
followed  a  scene  as  disgraceful  to  the  enemy  as  it 
was  revolting  to  civilized  man.  After  the  Texians 
had  surrendered  up  their  arms,  an  indiscriminate 
slaughter  took  place ;  and,  before  any  stop  was  put 
to  it  by  the  Mexican  officers,  thirty-six  of  our  fifty- 
three  men  fell  a  sacrifice  to  their  inhuman  cruelty ; 
fifteen  more  were  taken  prisoners,  while  two  only 
made  their  escape.  Of  the  fifteen  taken  prisoners, 
several  were  inhumanly  butchered  with  swords  and 


LAW    OF    RETALIATION.  33 

lances ;  from  which  wounds,  however,  they  recov- 
ered, after  long  and  severe  suffering.  Not  only  the 
officers  in  immediate  command,  but  especially  Gen- 
eral Woll,  and  the  whole  Mexican  nation,  are  re- 
sponsible for  this  outrageous  and  savage  butchery, 
after  the  surrender  of  our  arms,  and  while  the  flag 
of  peace  still  waved ;  but  a  day  of  retribution  will 
assuredly  overtake  them,  terrible  though  just. 

The  law  of  retaliation  in  war — the  most  salutary  of 
all  laws  in  preventing  the  excesses  of  an  enemy — as 
yet,  has  never  been  resorted  to  by  the  Texians  ;  that 
law  which  should  have  been  inflicted  upon  Santa 
Anna,  and  each  and  every  one  of  his  men  at  San 
Jacinto,  for  his  recent  murder  of  Colonel  Fannin 
and  his  four  hundred,  was  permitted  to  sleep ;  and 
the  cunning  tyrant  flattered  his  captor  into  a  vain 
consequence,  which  made  him  forgetful  of  his  duty 
to  his  country  and  these  murdered  heroes.  Had 
Washington  commanded  at  San  Jacinto,  with  all 
his  human  kindness  and  Christian  charity,  the  cap- 
tive despot  would  have  found  a  rope,  and  his  men 
no  quarter.  Thus  would  he  have  balanced  that 
bloody  account,  and  thus  would  he  have  kept  it  bal- 
anced. What  has  the  reverse  of  this  policy  benefited 
us  1  It  has  been,  for  the  last  seven  years,  an  unlimit- 
ed license  for  our  enemy  to  plunder  and  murder ! 

To  return  to  our  narrative.  After  the  massacre 
of  Dawson  and  his  men,  General  Woll  made  a  tri- 
umphal entry  into  San  Antonio  with  his  fifteen 
prisoners  and  some  two  hundred  of  his  own  wound- 

E 


34  MURDER    OF    DR.  SMITHERS. 

ed,  and  prepared  for  a  hasty  retreat  towards  the  Rio 
Grande.  This  retreat  he  greatly  hastened,  upon 
hearing  that  Colonels  Mayfield,  Moore,  M'Cullough, 
and  others,  were  coming  up  with  re-enforcements 
to  Caldwell. 

Some  days  previous  to  this  time,  he  had  or- 
dered Colonel  John  M.  Seguin,  with  several  hun- 
dred cavalry,  to  proceed  as  far  as  the  Guadaloupe 
River,  and  report  to  him  the  condition  of  things 
there.  It  is  believed  that  Seguin  never  went  far- 
ther than  the  Cibelo  Mineral  Springs,  where  he 
knew  that  Dr.  Smithcrs  and  two  others  were  stay- 
ing for  their  health.  These  three  sick  men  he  bar- 
barously murdered,  and  thereby  made  himself  mas- 
ter of  Dr.  Smithers's  fine  American  horse,  which  his 
family  drove  in  a  buggy  to  the  Rio  Grande.  Se- 
guin, however,  upon  his  return,  reported  to  General 
Woll  that  all  the  Texian  settlers  had  fled  from  the 
Guadaloupe.  When  General  Woll  found  the  Tex- 
ian re-enforcement  coming  up,  and  that  Seguin  had 
deceived  him,  he  laid  violent  hands  upon  every 
means  of  transportation  in  his  reach.  Among  other 
things,  he  seized  a  large  number  of  carts,  into  which 
he  crowded  his  and  our  wounded  in  piles,  many  of 
whom  died  for  want  of  medical  assistance  ;  and  we 
are  informed  by  Captain  Fitzgerald  and  Mr.  Van 
Ness  that  only  two  of  their  wounded  recovered  ; 
their  wounds  not  having  been  attended  to  for  eight 
days,  they  were  become  past  recovery. 

With  all  General  Wolfs  hurry  in  his  flight  home- 


MEXICAN    CUPIDITY.  35 

ward,  at  the  Rio  Hondo  he  found  Caldwell  upon 
his  heels.  His  retreat  became  a  flight  and  a  panic: 
and  had  the  Texians  charged  him,  as  all  now  agree, 
and  as  all  then  seemed  to  be  anxious  to  do,  his 
whole  force  would  have  fallen  an  easy  prey.  Much 
has  been  said  against  Caldwell  and  others  for  not 
so  doing,  and  the  blame  has  been  charged  upon  sev- 
eral ;  but  the  writer  has  not  been  able  to  satisfy  his 
mind  that  any  particular  individual  was  to  blame.  It 
seems  to  be  one  of  those  mischances  in  war,  more 
the  result  of  accident  or  the  want  of  promptness 
than  the  absence  of  bravery.  It  was,  however,  a 
national  misfortune  that  he  was  permitted  to  escape 
to  the  west  side  of  the  Rio  Grande,  after  murdering 
forty-one,  and  carrying  off  sixty-seven  of  our  best 
citizens. 

General  Woll  had  persons  in  his  employment 
well  calculated  for  spies  and  pilots,  and  adepts  in 
robbery  and  murder.  Among  the  principal  of  these 
was  Antonio  Periz  and  John  M.  Seguin,  both  of 
whom  had  been  constantly  in  the  employment  of 
our  government ;  and  when  they  witnessed  the  de- 
termined efforts  of  President  Houston  to  destroy  the 
seat  of  government  and  break  up  our  western  set- 
tlements, their  cupidity  prevailed  over  all  their  love 
for  Texas,  and  they  determined  to  have  a  share  in 
the  general  plunder,  a  result  which  is  the  universa 
consequence  of  a  broken-up  frontier.  Besides,  from 
the  melancholy  account  which  President  Houston 
had  just  then  promulgated  to  the  world  of  the  con- 


36  TREACHERY    OF    SEGUIN. 

dition  of  Texas,  they  had  the  weakness  to  believe 
that  she  must  again  become  an  integral  portion  of 
Mexico.  This  they  believed  was  a  most  favourable 
opportunity  to  reinstate  themselves  in  the  favour  of 
their  mother-country.  In  1836  they  had  been  trai- 
tors to  that  country — the  country  of  their  language, 
laws,  religion,  and  birth — and  now,  Mexican-like, 
they  sought  to  reinstate  themselves  by  an  act  of 
compound  treason  upon  us.  What  possible  justifi- 
cation in  the  eyes  of  honourable  men  could  Seguin 
have  for  this?  He  had  enjoyed  the  confidence  and 
favour  of  three  administrations  ;  he  had  uniformly 
been  in  high  civil  and  military  commissions ;  and 
yet,  for  this  double  act  of  perfidy,  his  friend,  Presi- 
dent Houston,  pronounces  him  as  pure  a  patriot  as 
any  in  the  land.  I  have  the  evidence  of  Captain 
Fitzgerald,  and  Messrs.  Van  Ness  and  Hancock,  the 
three  Santa  Fe  prisoners  who  were  detained  at  San 
Fernando  until  January,  that  Don  Erasmo  Seguin, 
his  father,  then  at  San  Antonia,  was  in  daily  cor- 
respondence with  the  enemy  while  our  army  was 
marching  upon  the  Rio  Grande. 

The  Texians,  under  Caldwell,  returned  from  the 
Rio  Hondo  greatly  exasperated  at  not  being  allowed 
to  engage  General  Woll.  In  a  few  miles  they  met 
their  old  favourite  leader,  General  Burleson,  coming 
up  with  re-enforcements,  and  they  believed  that, 
with  him  as  a  commander,  they  would  have  engaged 
and  captured  their  enemy;  but  now  it  was  too  late. 
General  Burleson  may  not  be  considered  a  tactician 


GENERAL  WOLL  ENTERS  BEXAR.        37 

in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  but  he  never  failed  to 
observe  one  rule  in  winning  battles  more  important 
than  all  the  minutise  of  the  drill:  that  rule  is,  to  fight; 
and  his  uniform  success  in  many  a  hard-fought  bat- 
tle proves  that  in  this  art  he  is  abundantly  proficient. 


CHAPTER  V. 

President  Houston  issues  another  War  Proclamation. — Texians  again  in 
the  Field. — General  Somerville  arrives  in  Camp  and  Disbands  the 
Troops. — Volunteers  Organized.- — Burleson's  Arrival  at  Camp. — 
Houston's  Refusal  to  issue  him  Orders. — Volunteers  press  forward  to 
San  Antonio. — Somerville's  Arrival. — Montgomery  Troops  Return. — 
Operations  in  Camp  around  Bexar. 

This  second  invasion  of  our  country  in  the  same 
year,  and  the  atrocities  with  which  it  was  accompa- 
nied, were  well  calculated  to  arouse  anew  the  war 
feeling  which  President  Houston's  procrastinating 
ingenuity  had  in  a  great  measure  allayed.  The 
people  of  Texas  then  viewed  with  dismay  and  in- 
dignation the  wanton  neglect  of  the  navy,  his  refu- 
sal to  prosecute  war  after  Congress  and  the  nation 
had  decreed  it,  and  his  disbandment  and  abuse  of 
the  several  hundred  brave  volunteers  from  the  Uni- 
ted States.  General  Woll  entered  Bexar  on  the 
11th  September,  and,  as  before  stated,  captured 
judge,  jury,  bar,  and  citizens,  under  their  own 
roofs,  and  while  in  discharge  of  their  peaceable 
avocations.     This  news  reached  the  president  at 


38  ANOTHER    WAR-PROCLAMATION. 

Houston  on  the  16th  of  the  same  month,  on  which 
day  he  issued  another  flaming  war-proclamation.* 

Here  the  President  meets  this  universal  public 
indignation  which  his  ruinous  and  deceptious  poli- 
cy had  visited  upon  him,  by  again  joining  in  the 
war-cry.  The  aforesaid  proclamation  was  printed, 
and  distributed  extensively  throughout  the  country. 
It  called  "  upon  the  first  class  of  drafted  men  from 
many  counties  to  rendezvous  at  Bexar,  to  pursue 
the  enemy  into  Mexico,  chastise  him  for  his  inso- 
lence and  wrongs,"  and  concluded  by  saying,  "It  is 
hoped  you  will  call  to  your  lead  a  man  of  valour, 
wisdom,  and  experience."  Though  the  laws  of  the 
country  gave  the  citizens  this  latter  privilege  when 
in  the  field,  President  Houston  had  the  spring  be- 
fore denied  it,  and  yet  usurped  the  appointing 
power  over  them.  That  usurpation  of  their  lawful 
rights,  and  his  endeavour  to  force  upon  them  a  man 
not  of  their  choice,  had  broken  up  the  army  in  the 
spring.  Now  that  the  war-storm  raged  so  fiercely, 
he  yielded  this  point ;  and  all,  more  than  all,  called 
for  in  his  proclamation,  at  the  shortest  possible  no- 
tice were  in  their  saddles,  and  moving  rapidly  to 
the  seat  of  action.  The  writer  was  among  the  first 
two  or  three  hundred  from  the  middle  section  of  the 
country  who  arrived  at  Columbus,  upon  the  Colo- 

*  Volunteer  corps  were  raised  with  great  despatch  in  different  portions 
of  the  country,  and  from  the  one  organized  in  the  city  of  Houston,  which 
elected  General  Mosley  Baker  to  its  command,  he  (the  President)  requi- 
red a  pledge  that  "  they  would  cross  the  Rio  Grande'''1  before  he  agreed  that 
they  should  have  any  ammunition  from  the  public  stores. 


TROOPS    DISBANDED.  39 

rado,  where,  for  the  first  time,  they  met  the  news  of 
General  Woll's  evacuation  of  Bexar.  Here  we  met 
many  returning,  some,  doubtless,  glad  of  such  an  op- 
portunity to  do  so,  while  the  majority  deeply  lament- 
ed it.  What  was  to  be  done  1  was  the  question. 
Was  this  system  of  outrage  and  murder  to  be  for- 
ever practised  upon  us  with  impunity,  and  a  hun- 
dred miles'  flight  to  the  Rio  Grande  to  screen  our 
enemy  from  punishment  1  These  questions  were 
deliberately  considered  by  every  patriot  present. 
They  had  in  their  hands  the  President's  proclama- 
tion authorizing  and  commanding  them  to  pursue 
the  enemy  into  Mexico,  and  also  to  elect  their  own 
commander.  One  and  all  expressed  a  desire  for 
Burleson  to  lead  them,  and  said,  if  he  would  do  so, 
they  would  follow  the  enemy  home. 

In  this  state  of  uncertainty  and  doubt,  I  informed 
them  that  I  would  go  express  to  General  Burleson's 
house,  some  sixty  miles,  and  have  him  there  in  three 
days.  I  started  for  General  Burleson's,  and,  in  the 
mean  time,  General  Somerville  arrived  at  Colum- 
bus, and  hearing  that  Burleson  was  expected  to 
meet  the  troops  at  that  place,  he  hastily  disbanded 
them,  without  orders  from  the  government,  and 
started  back  to  his  custom-house  at  Matagorda  Bay. 
The  question  must  occur  to  every  reflecting  mind, 
Was  this  patriotic  in  General  Somerville,  after  he 
found  that  he  was  not  the  choice  of  the  troops,  to 
disband  them,  and  destroy  all  prospect  of  their  serv- 
ing their  country  under  another  leader  ?    This  was 


40       ARRIVAL  OF  GENERAL  BURLESON. 

the  second  time  General  S.  had  dispersed  the  army 
in  the  same  way.  In  March  previously  he  pertina- 
ciously insisted  upon  the  command  at  Bexar  over 
men  who  had  no  confidence  in  him,  thereby  driving 
a  large  and  respectable  army  from  the  field.  But 
at  Columbus  he  was  not  so  successful ;  and  though 
he  added  the  sanction  of  his  authority  as  brigadier- 
general  of  the  militia  to  their  going  home,  and  did 
himself  go,  there  was  a  patriotism  of  sterner  stuff 
which  he  could  not  control. 

The  gallant  Captains  Wm.  Ryan  and  F.  M.  Gib- 
son, of  Fort  Bend  county,  and  others,  called  for  vol- 
unteers, and  when  General  Burleson  arrived  the  third 
day,  as  I  promised,  they  were  ready  for  the  onward 
march.  General  B.  informed  them  that  he  would 
proceed  to  the  upper  Colorado  counties  and  Wash- 
ington, raise  what  men  he  could,  and  join  them  upon 
the  San  Antonio  River  in  two  weeks ;  adding  that, 
if  it  should  then  be  their  desire  for  him  to  lead  them, 
he  would  not  shrink  from  the  responsibility.  He 
proceeded  to  Washington  for  orders  from  the  Pres- 
ident, not  doubting  that  his  proclamation  of  the 
16th  of  the  month  previous,  authorizing  the  troops 
to  elect  their  own  commander,  would  be  denied. 
The  President  knew  full  well  that,  if  Burleson  re- 
ceived orders,  the  men  would  follow  him  and  the 
enemy  would  be  punished.  This  he  never  intended 
to  perform,  but  merely  told  General  B.  that  General 
Somerville  had  his  orders.  Burleson,  always  obedi- 
ent to  the  lawful  authorities  of  his  country,  returned 


STRANGE  CONDUCT  OF  SOMERVILLE.      41 

home,  and  left  the  future  conduct  of  the  campaign 
to  the  President  and  General  Somerville. 

During  this  time,  from  the  last  of  September  to 
the  first  of  November,  volunteers  pressed  forward 
to  the  San  Antonio  River,  all  eager  to  follow  the 
enemy,  and  punish  him  in  his  own  country.  In  the 
mean  time,  the  President  had  sent  to  General  Som- 
erville, at  Matagorda  Bay,  to  proceed  to  Bexar  and 
take  command,  at  which  place  he  arrived  about  five 
weeks  after  he  had  disbanded  the  troops  at  Colum- 
bus. Here  General  S.  found  about  twelve  hundred 
men  scattered  around  the  town,  at  from  one  to  ten 
miles,  in  some  six  or  eight  different  encampments ; 
and,  instead  of  concentrating  his  camp,  or  organ- 
izing and  drilling  his  men,  he  sits  down  in  the  town 
for  two  weeks,  receiving  the  hospitalities  of  those 
very  individuals  who  just  before  had  been  foremost 
in  entertaining  General  Woll.  Much  talk  had  been 
excited  against  these  individuals  in  the  Texian 
camp  for  their  open  and  kind  reception  of  the 
Mexican  general ;  and  now  that  they  had  a  favour- 
able opportunity  of  taking  shelter  under  the  protec- 
tion of  the  Texian  general  by  feasting  and  fandan- 
going him,  no  pains  in  this  respect  were  spared  to 
win  that  favour ;  and  from  the  two  weeks'  carnival 
he  held  in  the  town,  we  are  bound  to  believe  that 
they  won  it.  This  brought  about  the  17th  of  No- 
vember, and  with  it  a  most  cutting  north  wind, 
which  was  as  uncomfortable  to  those  men  without 
blankets,  lying  still  in  an  open  prairie,  as  General 

F 


42  DENUNCIATIONS   AGAINST    SOMERVILLE. 

S.'s  luxurious  indulgences  in  the  city  were  to  those 
who  had  blankets.  During  this  cold  weather,  it 
was  told  in  camp  that  the  general  would  have  been 
out  "  that  day,"  but  had  stopped  that  night  to  attend 
another  fandango.  What  was  murmur  and  dissat- 
isfaction before  against  the  general's  operations,  now 
became  loud  and  bitter  denunciations.  Many  be- 
lieved that  nothing  would  be  effected  under  him, 
while  others  were  more  highly  indignant  at  not  be- 
ing provided  with  those  absolute,  indispensable  mu- 
nitions of  war,  which  could  have  been  easily  obtain- 
ed from  the  hostile  citizens  of  Bexar.  Some  want- 
ed more  powder  and  lead,  which  were  known  to 
be  in  the  town,  and  which  had  been  tendered  Gen- 
eral Woll,  but  from  the  Texians  an  exorbitant  price 
in  silver  was  demanded.  This  was  equivalent  to  a 
refusal,  and  those  persons  who  held  these  articles 
well  knew  it.  As  friends  of  the  enemy,  they  did 
not  intend  that  the  Texians  should  have  them  if  in 
their  power  to  prevent  it.  Under  this  state  of  things, 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  Montgomery  regiment  re- 
turned home  under  feelings  of  indignation  and  dis- 
gust. Colonel  Bennett  and  about  seventy  of  the 
regiment  remained.  By  some,  blame  has  been  at- 
tached to  the  Montgomery  troops  for  returning  at 
this  time  ;  but  they  returned  under  the  known  sanc- 
tion of  President  Houston ;  and  the  writer,  know- 
ing all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  can  more  read- 
ily excuse  them ;  for,  said  they,  it  was  easy  to  fore- 
see that  no  good  to  the  country  would  be  effected 
under  General  Somerville. 


WANT   OF   NECESSARIES   FOR    THE   ARMY.  43 

After  the  return  of  these  Montgomery  troops,  and 
when  general  dissatisfaction  prevailed  in  camp, 
through  the  urgent  request  of  the  quartermaster- 
general,  Colonel  Wm.  G.  Cook,  he  was  permitted  to 
press  into  service  a  few  sacks  of  salt  and  some  lead, 
while  Captain  Bogart,  of  Washington  county,  and 
the  writer  became  individually  responsible  for  iron 
to  shoe  the  barefooted  horses.  Did  General  Somer- 
ville  doubt  his  authority  to  take  for  the  use  of  the 
army  absolute  necessaries  ?  If  so,  why  was  that 
district  of  country  declared  to  be  under  military  law? 
Did  our  enemy  do  less  ?  No  !  they  not  only  took 
absolute  necessaries  for  the  camp,  but  everything 
else  which  their  thieving  propensities  instigated 
them  to  take.  Was  it  just  to  Texas  that  these  peo- 
ple should  do  less  for  her  than  for  the  enemy  1  Or 
was  it  due  to  Texas  that  General  Somerville  should 
give  to  these  people  a  protection  which  would  en- 
able them  to  keep  Bexar  as  a  military  granary  and 
magazine  for  the  enemy  1  Or  was  it  due  to  Texas 
that  we  required  of  them  less  than  they  were  will- 
ing to  furnish  the  Mexicans  1  The  bad  adminis- 
tration of  the  commissariat  department  was  a  fruit- 
ful source  of  complaint  in  the  Texian  camp.  They 
had  not  been  furnished  with  proper  rations  of  beef 
or  bread-stuff.  Was  it  because  they  were  not  to  be 
had  ?  No  !  a  large  number  of  disaffected  Mexicans, 
who  had  fled  with  General  Woll  to  the  Rio  Grande, 
had  left  the  most  of  their  cattle  behind  them,  and 
the  most  bountiful  corn  crop  that  had  been  raised 


44        COMPLAINTS    OF    THE    TEXIANS    JUSTIFIED. 

on  the  San  Antonio  for  the  last  ten  years.  And 
though  the  troops  were  at  this  time  using  from  fif- 
teen to  twenty  beeves  per  day,  a  requisition  was 
made  upon  the  different  ranches  for  fifty  beeves  to 
take  them  to  the  Rio  Grande;  a  number  barely  suffi- 
cient for  the  army  while  these  fifty  were  collecting. 
To  the  energy  and  promptness  of  Colonel  Bennett, 
of  the  Montgomery  regiment,  the  army  was  princi- 
pally indebted  for  the  beef  it  obtained.  He  detailed 
men  from  his  regiment,  and  had  three  or  four  hun- 
dred beeves  drove  up,  which  were  yet  barely  suffi- 
cient to  last  the  army  during  its  slothful  march  to 
Lovedo. 

That  the  Texian  troops  complained  was  most 
natural  and  just.  They  well  knew  that  their  Mexi- 
can enemies  had  in  their  neighbourhood  three  or  four 
thousand  cattle.  They  also  knew  that  from  thirty 
to  fifty  thousand  bushels  of  corn  had  been  left  by 
them,  and  not  exceeding  two  thousand  bushels  had 
been  used  by  our  troops.  They  also  knew  that  a 
grist-mill,  capable  of  grinding  60  bushels  of  corn  per 
day,  which  had  freely  supplied  the  Mexican  army, 
was  close  by  them.  They  also  knew  that  salt,  pow- 
der, lead,  and  other  necessaries  were  in  the  town. 
Knowing  these  things,  they  complained,  and  rightly 
complained. 

But  did  these  good  causes  of  complaint  drive  them 
home  1  No  !  most  of  these  men  left  their  homes  in 
September  under  a  solemn  conviction  that  duty  to 
their    country  and  themselves   required   that  they 


THEIR   ANXIETY    TO   MEET   THE    ENEMY.  45 

should  pursue  the  enemy  in  his  retreat,  and  "punish 
his  aggressions."  They  rejoiced  as  they  believed 
that  President  Houston  had  finally  adopted  that  be- 
lief. They  had  now  been  from  their  homes  from 
September  up  to  the  18th  of  November,  which  found 
them  some  twenty  miles  west  of  San  Antonio,  upon 
the  Precidio  crossing  of  the  Medina.  They  were 
yet  760  strong,  and  within  five  days'  march  of  Gen- 
eral Woll's  retreating  army,  which  had  halted  near 
Precidio  to  give  them  battle.  The  men  were  anx- 
ious for  the  fight,  and,  had  General  Somerville  moved 
promptly  upon  Woll,  we  are  assured  by  Captains 
Fitzgerald  and  Van  Ness  that  the  whole  Mexican 
army  would  have  been  captured  without  a  second 
fire  ;  that  most  of  the  Mexican  officers  and  men  came 
to  them,  when  they  heard  that  Somerville  was  ad- 
vancing upon  Precidio,  to  know  how  they  should 
surrender,  and  what  to  say  to  the  Texians  to  save 
their  lives. 

During  the  six  or  eight  days,  while  the  remainder 
of  the  Texian  army  lay  at  this  place,  they  were 
greatly  cheered  with  the  hope  of  speedily  meeting 
General  Woll.  These  days,  in  the  absence  of 
General  Somerville,  who  was  still  in  Bexar,  were 
well  improved.  Many  of  the  men  left  their  homes 
during  the  warm  days  of  September,  with  pantaloons 
too  thin  for  the  sharp  weather  of  November;  and 
now,  in  the  absence  of  a  uniform  military  clothing 
establishment,  they  in  the  shortest  time  transferred 
the  covering  of  many  an  unwary  buck  to  their  own 


46  HOW    TO    MEET   AN  EMERGENCY. 

legs.  I  never  saw  deer  so  plenty ;  many  hundreds 
were  killed,  and  the  whole  camp  for  several  days 
had  more  the  appearance  of  a  tremendous  tanyard 
than  an  army  which  expected  in  a  few  days  to  meet 
the  national  enemy  upon  his  own  soil.  Indeed, 
the  scene  here  presented  was  no  bad  illustration  of 
the  facility  with  which  Texians  can  accommodate 
themselves  to  unforeseen  emergencies ;  and  he  who 
could  not  creep  upon  the  most  keen-sighted  buck, 
and  "  ease  him  of  his  jacket,"  was  not  fit  for  a  sol- 
dier ;  and  many  who  could  not  or  wTould  not  do  it, 
returned  home,  as  they  said,  "  to  get  some  warm 
clothing." 

Our  experience  is,  that  those  who  "  go  home  for 
warm  clothing,"  a  "better  horse,"  or  "better  gun," 
almost  invariably  stay  there ;  and,  in  my  opinion, 
there  they  should  stay,  for  I  never  knew  a  man  truly 
anxious  to  meet  the  enemy  turn  back  under  any  pre- 
tence whatever.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  known  men 
to  go  out  without  either  horse  or  gun,  and  never 
knew  them  to  fail  in  being  armed  before  the  pinch- 
ing time.  One  lad  in  particular  I  recollect  to  have 
overtaken  on  foot  and  unarmed,  pressing  forward  to 
the  army ;  and,  upon  my  inquiring  after  his  horse 
and  arms,  he  said,  with  the  utmost  simplicity,  "I 
have  neither,  sir,  but  expect  the  old  general  will  let 
me  fight  upon  my  own  hook  with  stones  until  one 
of  our  boys  is  killed,  and  then  I  can  get  his."  I 
asked  him  if  he  was  good  at  throwing  stones.  "  I 
am  pretty  good  when  I  get  close  enough,  sir,"  was 


PREPARATIONS    OF    THE    ARMY.  47 

his  modest  answer.  I  need  hardly  add  that  he  proved 
himself  a  soldier. 

On  the  contrary,  those  whom  I  have  observed  with 
the  most  bloody  mottoes  painted  upon  their  caps 
were  the  last  to  prove  them  true  ;  and  I  do  not  rec- 
ollect of  seeing  one  with  a  "  Liberty  or  death"  motto 
who  did  not  take  the  liberty  of  returning  home  a 
little  too  soon.  One  of  these  Republicans  wore  upon 
his  hat,  in  large  capitals,  "  Patriae  infelici  fidelis,"  and 
he  was  "  faithful  enough  to  his  unhappy  country"  to 
eat  his  fall  share  of  beef  until  he  got  sight  of  the 
enemy,  but  then  returned  home  in  disgust  without 
fighting  him. 

This  week  upon  the  Medina  was  a  week  of  anx- 
ious expectation.  The  "  artillery  was  coming  up," 
General  Woll  was  within  five  days'  march,  the  rivers 
low,  and  no  impediment  between  us ;  and  we  be- 
lieved that  the  last  of  the  timid  had  gone  home. 
Victory  already,  in  the  imaginations  of  many,  had 
perched  upon  our  standard ;  fat  beef  and  venison 
hams  were  in  the  greatest  profusion,  and  the  leather 
breeches-making  went  on  cheerily.  Indeed,  such 
was  the  contempt  in  which  General  Woll's  division 
was  held,  that  it  looked  more  like  a  preparation  for 
a  tournament  in  which  every  man  was  required  to 
be  clad  in  deer-hides. 

At  the  first  meeting  of  citizen  soldiers  in  camp, 
the  reader  must  not  expect  to  find  that  things  are 
done  as  in  a  regular  army.  In  a  regular  army,  drill- 
ed per  book,  there  is  a  mathematical  monotony  in 


48  SCENES    IN    CAMP. 

all  that  you  see,  hear,  or  do.  There  the  "morning 
reveille"  rouses  you  from  your  slumbers  with  that 
"same  old  beat,"  and  there  the  orderly  sergeants 
call  the  rolls  with  the  "  same  old  call."  Not  so  in 
the  commencement  of  a  Texas  campaign.  Here 
the  orderly  sergeants  are  no  small  characters ;  and, 
at  the  same  time  that  they  make  their  men  do  their 
duty,  they  are  ready  to  fight  for  their  respective 
companies,  will  always  squabble  for  good  rations, 
and  will  see  that  their  particular  companies  do  no 
more  than  their  due  proportion  of  general  camp- 
duty.  Here  the  "  crack  of  day"  is  the  signal  for 
true  genius.  Here  the  orderly  sergeants  are  all 
equally  busy  as  those  in  a  regular  army,  and  arrive 
at  the  same  end,  if  not  in  such  quick  time,  yet  in 
good  time.  Here  we  have  been  greatly  interested 
in  the  "  roll-calls."  Here  we  have  seen  a  good- 
tempered  farmer,  in  the  first  exercise  of  this  impor- 
tant office,  badly  puzzled  at  the  tardiness  of  his 
men.  In  his  first  administration,  we  have  heard 
him,  in  his  slow,  easy,  good-natured  tone,  saying, 
"  Do,  men,  for  God's  sake,  turn  out  here  !  What,  in 
the  name  of  Charity,  is  the  matter  with  you  all  V 
when  he  was  promptly  answered  in  the  same  long 
tone  by  some  young  saucebox,  "  Why,  Uncle  Bill, 
what  makes  you  in  such  a  hurry  this  morning  V 
Then  one  of  Uncle  Bill's  neighbours,  who  at  home 
was  in  the  habit,  thus  early  in  the  morning,  of  feed- 
ing his  stock,  and  who  now  is  as  punctual  in  his 
duty  to  his  country,  took  sides  with  Uncle  Bill,  and 


SCENES    IN    CAMP.  49 

bestirred  himself  among  his  sleeping  neighbours, 
gently  shaking  each  by  the  shoulder,  and  saying,  in 
the  kindest  manner,  "  Come,  come,  men,  do  get  up  ! 
don't  you  hear  Uncle  Bill  V  Now  a  young  chap, 
who  perhaps  had  not  been  in  more  than  half  a  doz- 
ez  campaigns,  and  who  has  vastly  more  of  the  amor 
patrice  in  his  soul  than  beard  upon  his  face,  "  feels 
his  keeping,"  shook  off  his  blanket,  flapped  his 
wings,  and  crowed.  Then  a  dozen  others  gobbled 
like  turkey-cocks  in  an  April  morning,  while  at  the 
same  time  some  patriarchal  owl,  the  head  of  the 
neighbouring  generations,  waked  up  the  surround- 
ing hills  with  a  stirring  whoop,  when  he  was  an- 
swered by  his  whole  family  of  big-eyes  in  a  lan- 
guage more  distinct,  and  to  us  far  more  intelligible, 
than  many  Indian  tribes  we  have  known. 

The  roll-call  continues.  In  the  distance  we  heard 
"OldKentuck/'inhis  thundering  bass,  lumbering  over 
his  roll  as  if  he  was  making  a  stump  speech  upon  Salt 
River  to  all  the  political  bipeds  and  quadrupeds  in 
those  parts.  A  little  to  one  side  of  him  was  Jack 
Johnson.  Jack  is  an  old  soldier — served  his  seven 
years  in  the  United  States  army.  Here  is  mathe- 
matics, and  here  is  a  cross  to  your  name  unless  you 
answer  the  "  first  pop."  Nearer  still  to  us  was  the 
prince  of  orderlies :  he  would  spring  from  his  lair 
like  a  surprised  deer,  with  a  shrill,  clear  snort,  which 
would  penetrate  to  the  inmost  recess  of  the  soundest 
sleeper,  and  then  commence  like  a  ready  orator, 
"  Tumble  out  here,  boys,  immediately,  if  not  sooner," 

G 


50  CITIZEN   SOLDIERS. 

and  go  through  his  roll  with  as  many  variations  of 
wit  and  humour  as  he  had  calls.  This  was  Bob 
Waters,  of  the  Fort  Bend  company.  Bob  is  a  small, 
active,  quick  spoken,  and  quick  moving  man,  and 
wore  a  cap  made  by  himself  out  of  a  skin  which  he 
took  from  a  leopard-cat  in  a  Brasos  canebrake  ;  and 
after  a  peregrination  of  two  years  in  Mexico  under 
the  aforesaid  cap,  and  performing  in  every  calaboose 
from  the  Rio  Bravo  to  the  Castle  of  Perote,  is  again 
making  cotton  bales  upon  Oyster  Creek. 

These  are  the  Texas  substitutes  for  the  regular 
army  reveille,  which  makes  all  wide  awake,  and 
which,  unlike  that  reveille,  puts  all  in  good  hu- 
mour. Good  humour  and  emulation,  in  equal  por- 
tions, with  a  few  grains  of  ambition,  go  far  to  make 
both  men  and  women  do  their  duty. 

Here  is  the  commencement  of  a  Texas  campaign 
by  citizen  soldiers  when  not  in  the  vicinity  of  an 
enemy.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  however,  that  as 
the  necessity  of  vigilance  and  discipline  increases, 
no  men  ever  conform  more  readily  to  that  necessity; 
and,  as  evidence  of  which,  the  whole  Texas  Revo- 
lution does  not  furnish  the  first  instance  of  Texians 
being  surprised. 

One  thing  we  will  here  premise,  and  beg  the  read- 
er to  bear  it  in  mind,  that  we  do  not  hold  it  as  in- 
dispensable to  an  efficient  soldier  in  American  war- 
fare that  he  must  be  educated,  and  conform  to  the 
strictest  rules  of  the  scientific  schools.  The  histo- 
ry of  the  campaigns  we  are  about  to  record,  as  well 


EUROPEAN  AND  AMERICAN  WARFARE.      51 

as  the  whole  Texas  Revolution,  furnish  abundant 
proof  that,  as  an  aggregate,  more  efficient  soldiers 
were  never  in  uniform.  European  and  American 
warfare — warfare  in  an  open  country  with  walled 
towns,  and  in  American  forests  and  swamps — should 
be  as  essentially  different  as  if  they  were  distinct 
trades.  The  Texas  people  are  perfect  in  the  lat- 
ter, while  they  would  be  eminently  efficient  in  the 
former,  because  they  are  the  best  marksmen  in  the 
world,  and  it  is  a  cardinal  point  with  them  never 
to  fire  without  covering  the  object  fired  at.  The 
books  teach  us  the  different  modes  of  carrying  a 
fortification  ;  here  tactics  is  most  needed,  while  in 
American  warfare  circumstances  so  often  occur 
which  no  book-rule  can  cover.  The  draught,  then, 
is  upon  the  intellect,  and  he  who  can  draw  most 
heavily  upon  this  source  is  most  efficient.  It  is 
alone  the  natural  intellect  which  teaches  strategy, 
if  we  may  be  allowed  the  word.  In  Europe  war 
should  be  the  science  of  tactics,  while  in  America, 
in  contradistinction,  it  should  be  the  art  of  strategy. 
Let  us  return  to  the  Medina  camp. 

Thus,  towards  the  close  of  this  week  of  breeches- 
making  and  plenty,  both  the  general  and  the  artil- 
lery arrived,  and  orders  were  issued  for  immediate 
march. 


52  MARCH    UPON    LAREDO. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

General  Somerville  marches  upon  Laredo. — Gets  into  a  Bog. — Taking  of 
Lovedo. — Neglect  to  Ration  the  Troops. — Camp  moved  in  the  Direction 
towards  Home. — Council  of  War. — First  Texian  Flag  planted  west  of 
the  Rio  Grande. — General  Somerville  starts  Home. — Camp  without 
Water. — Much  Discontent. — Another  War  Council. — Speech  from  the 
General. — 200  Troops  return  Home,  and  the  General  marches  with 
those  remaining  against  the  Enemy. — Cross  the  Rio  Grande  near 
Guerrero. — Get  Sight  of  the  Enemy. — Recross  the  Rio  Grande  for 
Home,  and  separate  from  the  Main  Body. 

General  Somerville,  however,  was  too  skilled 
in  the  art  of  strategy  to  let  such  a  favourable  op- 
portunity escape  him  of  surprising  Laredo.  So, 
after  sending  back  the  artillery  which  he  had  taken 
some  two  weeks  to  bring  up,  he  suddenly  makes  a 
"left  oblique"  for  the  Laredo  road,  with  an  inten- 
tion of  surprising  that  defenceless  town  in  six  or 
seven  days.  The  third  and  fourth  days  of  this  sur- 
prising march  found  the  general  in  a  most  surpri- 
sing post-oak  bog  about  thirty  miles  distant.  All 
persons  who  have  once  been  in  a  post-oak  region 
after  a  heavy  rain,  would  again  avoid  so  doing  as  a 
pestilence.  This  kind  of  land,  with  much  appear- 
ance of  firmness  to  the  eye,  and  sufficiently  firm  to 
bear  a  man's  weight,  will  let  horses'  feet  through; 
and,  after  once  through  the  grass  sod,  the  soft  quick- 
sand beneath  will  soon  worry  the  animal  down. 
However,  the  glory  of  surprising  Laredo  put  the 
army  in  this  bog  instead  of  carrying  it  a  few  miles 


GET    INTO    A    BOG.  53 

around.  Two  days  were  employed  in  five  miles  of 
this  kind  of  land,  and  during  the  whole  time  a 
scene  was  enacted  ludicrous  beyond  all  power  of 
description.  The  whole  seven  hundred  and  sixty 
men,  horses,  and  packs  were  scattered  over  the 
prairie  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  some  floun- 
dering and  plunging  forth ;  some  with  their  bodies 
down  upon  the  grass,  their  legs  entirely  out  of  sight, 
and  their  noses  upon  the  ground  in  perfect  quie- 
tude, as  well  as  to  say  to  their  owners,  "You  put 
me  in  here,  now  get  me  out,"  while  the  owner 
would  be  standing  by,  giving  utterance  to  all  man- 
ner of  curious  oaths ;  some  would  be  lying  upon 
their  sides,  afraid  to  trust  their  legs  under  them ; 
while  the  poor  pack-mules,  with  their  little  feet, 
stood  the  worst  kind  of  chance.  The  coffee-pots 
and  frying-pans  would  go  one  way,  and  the  a/para- 
jos  and  other  camp  appurtenances  another.  One 
horse,  stronger  or  more  used  to  getting  through  a 
bog  than  another,  would  call  forth  from  his  com- 
paratively happy  owner  jests  upon  a  more  unfortu- 
nate comrade,  which  would  be  returned  in  curses 
upon  their  general,  whom  they  dubbed  all  manner 
of  funny  names.  Here  one  would  strike  a  fire  and 
go  to  cooking,  as  he  would  say,  "  while  his  animal 
could  blow,"  while  there  a  squad  would  be  discuss- 
ing the  smartness  of  their  general ;  some  would 
conclude  "they  had  seen  enough,"  while  others 
would  say  that  "they  had  seen  the  elephant,"  and 
some,  "if  ever  they  got  out  of  that  place  they  would 


54  SIEGE    OF    LAREDO. 

go  home."  When  they  got  through  about  twenty 
did  go  home. 

To  a  people  less  patriotic  and  less  anxious  to 
serve  their  country,  this  would  have  driven  the  whole 
of  them  home.  They  were  determined,  however, 
to  let  nothing  dishearten  them.  Though  they  had 
the  smallest  confidence  in  General  Somerville's 
ability  as  a  leader,  yet  they  ardently  desired  to  be 
led  against  the  enemy,  believing  that  sufficient  in- 
telligence existed  in  the  army  to  conduct  it  to  a 
certain  victory;  and  under  this  noble  impulse  they 
wTould  have  followed  a  crooked  stick  carried  before 
the  army  as  their  general. 

This  "surprise"  march  against  Laredo,  instead  of 
seven  days,  lasted  seventeen.  On  the  night  of  the 
7th  of  December  the  Texian  forces  approached  the 
town,  and  a  most  formidable  preparation  was  made 
for  attack.  Had  this  peaceable  and  defenceless 
place  contained  the  whole  of  General  Woll's  divis- 
ion, greater  preparations  could  not  have  been  made. 
After  travelling  all  day,  the  men  were  kept  mount- 
ed all  night ;  the  mysterious  whisperings  and  grave 
concealments  which  the  general  frequently  held,  led 
the  men  to  believe  that  they  would  have  a  fight  at 
daylight,  the  appointed  time.  All  were  ordered  to 
keep  dead  silence,  and  all  was  dead  silence.  Men 
never  acted  better,  and  a  more  perfect  obedience  to 
orders  never  existed  in  any  camp.  The  writer  was 
with  the  two  advance  companies  of  Captains  Hays 
and  Bogart,  who  were  ordered  to  pass  up  the  river 


SHORT    RATIONS.  55 

bank  and  prevent  any  retreat  in  that  direction, 
while  the  main  force  was  to  approach  the  town  in 
the  rear.  At  daylight  we  entered  the  city,  where, 
instead  of  meeting  an  enemy  worthy  our  steel,  all 
our  belligerant  feelings  were  turned  into  shame  for 
ourselves ;  for  we  met  some  women,  children,  and 
old  men,  who  seemed  as  glad  to  see  us  as  if  we  had 
been  their  near  relations.  All  felt  they  were  badly 
humbugged ;  and  thus  ended  what  the  men,  in  rid- 
icule, called  "  the  siege  of  Laredo." 

The  authorities  then  conducted  the  army  to  a 
camping-place  about  one  mile  above  the  town,  and 
promised  to  supply  provisions.  About  noon,  eight 
or  ten  beeves  were  driven  to  camp  and  butchered, 
which  was  bare  rations  for  one  day.  They,  having 
been  promised  supplies  of  bread-stuff  and  other  ne- 
cessaries, waited  patiently  that  day  for  them,  and 
when  none,  or  but  a  very  small  and  insufficient 
quantity  was  furnished,  they  naturally  expressed 
dissatisfaction.  In  the  evening  of  that  day,  the  8  th, 
the  general  ordered  the  army  down  below  the  town 
about  three  miles,  in  the  direction  of  the  San  An- 
tonio road.  The  main  road  down  the  Rio  Grande 
was  on  the  west  side,  and  the  crossing  at  Laredo. 
"  Why  did  the  general  not  cross  the  river  at  that 
point,  and  take  the  main  road  V!  was  the  inquiry  in 
every  one's  mouth.  No  satisfactory  answer  was 
given,  and  I  suspected,  what  the  next  day  proved, 
that  he  was  wending  his  way  home !  Feeling  as 
others  felt,  that,  if  he  did  so,  it  would  be  a  lasting 


56  FIRST    TEXIAN    BANNER    PLANTED. 

disgrace  upon  our  country  and  ourselves  to  return 
without  crossing  into  Mexico,  I  took  five  men  with 
me,  crossed  the  river  to  the  small  town  of  Galves- 
ton, planted  the  Texian  banner  in  the  name  of  our 
country,  demanded  of  the  alcalde  five  good  mules, 
which  the  boys  took,  and  recrossed  the  river  to 
camp.  This  place  was  the  military  station  of  Col- 
onel Bravo,  who  was  then  secreted  in  Laredo, 
while  his  troops  were  still  at  that  place.  Upon  my 
return  to  camp,  I  informed  the  officers  that  I  had 
been  among  Bravo's  troops,  expecting,  of  course, 
General  Somerville  would  send  and  capture  them  . 
but  his  mind  was  in  other  ways  intent. 

The  next  day,  the  9th,  still  little  or  no  provis- 
ions had  been  furnished,  and  the  dissatisfaction 
among  our  men  grew  loud  and  determined.  In  this 
state  of  feeling,  the  men  said  that  if  the  general  was 
too  great  a  friend  of  the  Mexicans  to  feed  them,  they 
would  feed  themselves,  and  about  three  hundred 
marched  into  the  town  and  took  what  they  pleased. 
Much  has  been  said  by  the  partisans  of  General 
Somerville  about  the  plunder  of  Laredo,  giving  that 
as  evidence  of  insubordination  in  the  army,  and 
thereby  wishing  to  excuse  his  hasty  flight  home. 
Though  the  writer  would  neither  have  advised  or 
countenanced  it,  yet  he  cannot  be  blind  to  good  rea- 
sons which  the  troops  had  for  so  doing.  Most  of 
these  men  had  already  been  from  their  homes  three 
months  ;  they  had  been  promised,  time  after  time,  to 
be  led  against  the  enemy  ;  they  had  been  promised 


IMPROVIDENCE    OF    SOMERVILLE.  57 

that  when  they  reached  the  Rio  Grande  they  should 
have  all  necessary  supplies.  Had  these  promises 
been  fulfilled  in  any  particular  I  Was  it  right  that 
the  Texians  should  demand  less  of  these  people  than 
the  Mexican  army  invariably  do  1  And  was  it  not 
absolutely  just  and  proper  that  General  Somerville 
should  have  carried  out  his  reasonable  promises  to 
them  ?  The  men  saw  plainly  that  their  three  months 
toil  was  to  be  swallowed  up  in  the  glory  of  getting 
a  view  of  the  Rio  Grande,  and  then  a  hasty  and  dis- 
graceful flight  home,  and  without  provisions  to  take 
them  there.  Under  this  state  of  things,  a  portion  of 
them  entered  the  town,  and  took,  among  absolute 
necessaries,  many  articles  of  a  useless  character. 
Though  the  unquestioned  laws  of  war  and  of  na- 
ture gave  these  men  a  perfect  right  to  take  all  ne- 
cessaries for  their  subsistence,  did  their  general  in- 
struct them  in  what  they  consisted  1  No  !  when 
his  own  improvidence  left  the  men  to  feed  them- 
selves, without  such  instruction,  it  was  reasonable  to 
expect  they  would  also  take  useless  and  unnecessary 
articles.  Had  the  general  said  to  the  men,  "  I  have 
furnished  you  these  ten  beeves  and  these  few  sacks 
of  flour ;  I  can  do  no  more,  now  look  out  for  your- 
selves ;  here  is  a  list  of  articles  which  you  have  a 
right  by  the  usages  of  war  to  take,  and,  as  Texians, 
it  is  expected  you  will  take  nothing  else."  Who 
believes  that  his  instructions  would  have  been  vio- 
lated 1  No  one  who  knows  anything  of  the  Texian 
character.     To  lay  aside  all  these  good  reasons,  did 

H 


58  TEXIAN    OBEDIENCE. 

not  the  Texians  have  a  clear  right,  by  the  lex  tali- 
onis  of  war,  not  only  to  do  so,  but  to  lay  every  Mex- 
ican town  upon  the  frontier  in  ashes  \  Did  not  the 
burning  of  our  towns  in  1836,  and  their  subsequent 
plunder  of  Refugio  and  San  Antonio  give  them  this 
right  ?  It  clearly  did  !  But  a  false  magnanimity, 
which  shielded  Santa  Anna  at  San  Jacinto,  seemed 
to  possess  General  Somerville,  as  it  doubtless  did 
his  Mexican  advisers ;  and  a  greater  interest  was 
manifested  by  them  for  the  "poor  Mexicans"  which 
was  sung  morning,  noon,  and  night  throughout  the 
camp,  than  for  our  own  men. 

And  to  show  with  what  willingness  Texians  will 
yield  to  council  and  authority,  no  sooner  had  they 
returned  with  these  articles  to  camp,  than  they  were 
told  that  in  a  council  of  officers  thirteen  out  of  four- 
teen captains  had  voted  for  crossing  the  Rio  Grande, 
and  that  it  was  requested  they  should  give  up  the 
articles  taken  from  Laredo,  to  be  sent  back  by  the 
alcalde.  They  almost  to  a  man  did  so.  These 
articles  were  carried  to  the  general's  quarters,  and 
he  sent  for  the  alcalde  and  delivered  them  to  him, 
to  be  returned  to  their  respective  owners.  Did  this 
show  more  the  love  of  plunder  or  the  obedience  of 
orders  ?  The  general,  and  those  who  were  willing 
to  follow  him  home,  were  deprived  by  this  ready  ac- 
quiescence on  the  part  of  the  men  of  all  plea  of  in- 
subordination. Did  he  then  follow  the  advice  which 
had  been  so  unanimously  voted  in  the  council  of 
war — to  cross  the  river,  and  proceed  down  it  by  the 


fix."  59 

main  road  I  No  !  but  that  evening  started  in  a  di- 
rection down  the  river  on  the  east  side,  and  pro- 
ceeded several  miles  on  this  course,  all  believing, 
except  his  confidential  home  advisers,  that  he  still 
intended  to  cross  the  river  below,  when  suddenly 
the  head  of  the  line  was  turned  to  the  left,  into  a 
dense  and  most  difficult  chaparral.  For  several 
hours  the  men  were  wound  about  through  the  prick- 
ly-pears and  thorn-bushes,  turning  more  and  more  in 
the  direction  of  the  San  Antonio  road,  when,  about 
10  o'clock  at  night,  from  exhaustion,  sore  shins,  and 
disgust,  all  hands  came  to  a  halt,  without  water  and 
without  supper.  "  What  was  the  meaning  of  follow- 
ing so  long  in  the  direction  of  the  north  star,  when 
our  direction  lay  south'?"  was  in  every  mouth  ;  and  it 
was  not  until  some  time  after  stopping  for  the  night 
that  it  was  known  the  army  was  on  the  march  to 
San  Antonio.  This  was  so  contrary,  not  only  to 
the  will  of  the  men,  but  to  the  reiterated  threats 
on  the  part  of  the  general  to  punish  the  enemy  in 
his  own  country,  and  in  open  violation  also  of 
the  almost  unanimous  war-council  of  that  day, 
that  the  indignation  of  the  men  burst  forth  in  the 
loudest  abuse  upon  their  commander.  General 
Somerville's  eyes  were  then  open  for  the  first  time 
to  the  dilemma  in  which  he  was  placed,  of  crossing 
into  Mexico  and  fighting  the  enemy,  or  of  going 
home  under  a  popular  odium,  which  would,  in  all 
probability,  overwhelm  him.  In  every  direction  of 
the  camp  he  heard  himself  ridiculed  and  abused  the 


60  COUNCIL    OF    WAR. 

whole  night.  The  next  morning  he  remarked  to  an 
officer  with  whom  he  lay,  that  he  did  not  sleep  a 
wink  that  night.  In  such  a  quandary,  what  was  to  be 
done  1  He  had  in  his  confidence  some  who  urged 
him  forward  to  redeem  the  honour  of  his  country, 
while  the  Mexican  portion  of  his  advisers  persuaded 
him  to  retreat  home.  The  former  prevailed,  and 
next  morning  the  troops  were  informed  that  they 
would  be  conducted  to  water,  and  after  getting  some- 
thing to  eat,  that  another  war  council  would  be  held. 
Accordingly,  in  about  one  mile  water  was  found,  and 
after  getting  breakfast,  the  officers  were  called  to- 
gether in  council.  Out  of  fourteen  captains  pres- 
ent, still  eleven  were  for  pursuing  the  enemy  into 
Mexico,  and  giving  him  battle.  The  council  ad- 
journed, and  the  troops  were  accordingly  again  pa- 
raded. The  general  made  a  speech,  in  which  he 
desired  that  all  who  were  in  favour  of  crossing  to 
the  Rio  Grande  would  step  to  the  right,  and  those 
in  favour  of  returning  home  would  go  to  the  left ; 
that  if  it  was  still  their  desire  to  pursue  the  enemy, 
he  would  lead  them,  but  if  not,  his  commission  was 
in  their  hands,  and  he  would  cheerfully  serve  among 
the  foremost  in  the  ranks.  Throughout  his  remarks 
were  patriotic  and  cheering,  and  by  acclamation  he 
was  elected,  without  one  dissenting  voice,  their  "  vol- 
unteer leader.''  By  the  laws  of  Texas,  the  army  had 
a  perfect  right  to  elect  their  commander,  but  here- 
tofore they  had  not  claimed  this  privilege,  for  fear  it 
might  create  division,  and  furnish  a  pretext,  as  it  had 


MARCH  AGAINST  THE  ENEMY.  61 

the  spring  previous,  for  thwarting  the  expedition. 
When,  therefore,  the  proposition  came  from  Gen- 
eral Somerville  to  elect  their  commander,  it  was 
unanimously  met  by  the  men,  in  as  magnanimous  a 
spirit,  by  electing  him.  Of  the  740  men  present, 
about  200  voted  to  return  ;  they  were  placed  under 
the  command  of  Colonel  Bennett,  of  Montgomery, 
and  did  return,  while  the  balance  insisted  upon  be- 
ing led  against  the  enemy  in  the  most  enthusiastic 
terms. 

Notwithstanding  all  the  dissatisfaction  which  had 
been  expressed  previously  as  to  the  general's  course, 
such  was  the  patriotic  enthusiasm  of  the  men  at  the 
renewed  prospect  of  service  for  their  country,  that 
all  was  hushed,  and  a  more  obedient  and  willing 
citizen  soldiery  never  were  assembled.  The  march 
commenced  in  a  southern  direction,  so  as  to  strike 
the  river  opposite  Guerrero,  at  which  place  the  men 
were  informed  they  would  be  supplied  with  every 
necessary.  From  Laredo  to  Guerrero,  by  the  main 
road,  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  was  two  short 
days'  march,  while  winding  about  in  the  chapar- 
ral on  the  east  side  occupied  the  army  until  the 
14th,  when  they  reached  the  river  six  miles  from 
the  city,  and  opposite  an  Indian  village  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Rio  Salado.  This  tardy  and  zigzag  march 
of  General  Somerville  completely  bewildered  the 
enemy,  and  they  took  for  a  cunning  military  man- 
oeuvre what  the  tattered  pantaloons  and  sore  shins 
of  our  men  too  plainly  told  them  was  an  unpardon- 


62  CROSS    THE    RIO    GRANDE. 

able  piece  of  stupidity  and  a  cruel  waste  of  time. 
Had  General  Somerville  promptly  crossed  the  river 
at  Laredo  on  the  8th,  and  swept  down  it  by  the 
main  road  with  a  celerity  befitting  the  occasion,  he 
would  by  this  time  have  taken  every  town  down 
to  Rhinosa,  and  created  such  a  universal  panic  in 
that  country  as  to  have  caused  the  enemy  to  evac- 
uate Matamoras  and  fall  back  upon  Tampico,  leav- 
ing the  former  city  entirely  exposed. 

Upon  reaching  the  river,  a  portion  of  the  Ca- 
reese  tribe  of  Indians,  which  occupied  the  village 
upon  the  opposite  side,  appeared  greatly  alarmed, 
and  some  started  off  to  the  city  at  full  speed.  It 
was  perfectly  clear,  that  if  the  enemy  were  in  the 
city,  one  or  two  hours  would  bring  them  to  the  de- 
fence of  the  crossing,  which  even  a  small  force 
might  successfully  do  against  two  or  three  small 
boats,  and  hence  the  necessity  of  a  rapid  movement 
to  occupy  the  west  bank ;  but  no  orders  to  this  ef- 
fect were  given,  and  after  waiting  several  minutes 
in  such  expectation,  the  writer  and  Captain  Charles 
K.  Reese,  of  the  Brazoria  company,  jumped  into  a 
canoe  and  went  across,  hoisted  the  Texian  banner, 
procured  a  large  boat,  and  returned  with  the  two, 
when  the  troops  commenced  crossing  their  baggage 
and  swimming  their  horses.  After  the  two  advan- 
ced companies  of  Captains  Hays  and  Bogart  had 
crossed,  Captain  Bogart  and  the  writer  mounted 
their  horses  to  reconnoitre  the  road  in  the  direction 
of  the  city.     About  two  miles  distant  we  met  the 


A    "RUSE."  63 

advance  of  Colonel  Canales's  "  Defensors/'  number- 
ing about  three  hundred  mounted  men,  who  gave  us 
chase  to  within  half  a  mile  of  the  landing.  The 
writer,  being  upon  the  slowest  of  the  two  horses, 
was  left  in  the  rear,  and  must  have  been  captured 
had  he  not  bethought  himself  of  the  ruse  of  unfurl- 
ing the  blood-red  silk  flag  which  he  had  in  his  hat. 
Being  fully  occupied  in  guiding  his  horse  over  a 
rough  road,  and  carrying  his  rifle  in  his  hand,  he  took 
the  corner  of  it  in  his  teeth,  and  no  sooner  did  the 
enemy  see  it  than  they  ceased  the  pursuit,  doubtless 
supposing  it  was  an  intimation  to  an  ambuscade. 
The  enemy  then  flanked  off  upon  each  side  of  the 
road,  and  waited  several  hours,  within  a  mile,  for 
the  Texians  to  attack  them.  Permission  was  re- 
fused so  to  do,  and  after  dark  they  withdrew.  Why 
was  this  permission  refused  \  We  had  ample  force 
already  across  the  river  to  have  beaten  them.  Af- 
ter several  hours'  delay,  the  general  came  across,  but 
the  writer  has  never  heard  any  satisfactory  reason 
why  this  insolent  banter  of  the  enemy  was  not  met. 
Early  next  morning  the  rear-guard  of  the  army 
crossed,  and  a  good  portion  of  the  day  was  employ- 
ed by  the  general  in  guarding  a  fat  hog,  which,  he 
said,  belonged  to  "  these  good  friends,"  and  which 
hog  our  men  cast  wistful  glances  at.  He,  however, 
was  not  successful  in  his  kind  protection ;  for  his 
eyes  had  hardly  turned  a  minute  before  the  animal 
was  killed,  quartered,  and  divided  between  several 
messes. 


64  RECROSS    THE    RIO    GRANDE. 

Colonel  M'Cullough  had  been  sent  to  the  city 
to  demand  of  the  alcalde  rations  and  other  ne- 
cessaries for  the  army.  The  alcalde  returned  a 
cheerful  answer  that  everything  should  be  forthcom- 
ing by  the  time  the  army  arrived  in  town,  where 
good  quarters  were  prepared.  That  evening  the 
army  was  marched  in  the  direction  of  the  town,  en- 
camping one  mile  from  it,  in  an  exposed  situation, 
it  being  one  of  the  most  inclement  nights  ever  wit- 
nessed. To  this  exposed  situation  the  alcalde  sent 
a  few  old  hats  and  filthy  blankets,  some  few  beeves, 
and  less  than  one  quart  of  corn  for  each  horse.  The 
old  hats  and  blankets  should  have  been  an  insult  to 
the  general,  as  they  were  to  the  men,  and  the  very 
insufficient  quantity  of  rations  more  calculated  to 
make  men  mad  than  to  allay  their  hunger.  Why 
did  the  general  not  go  into  the  quarters  provided  in 
the  city  instead  of  exposing  his  men  to  such  a  cold 
rain  1  was  asked  throughout  the  camp,  and  no  an- 
swer given.  The  next  morning,  when  all  were 
cold,  wet,  and  hungry — having  had  no  supper  the 
night  before — and  expected  to  be  marched  into  com- 
fortable quarters  in  the  town,  the  head  of  the  line 
was  again  turned  towards  home,  and  the  army 
marched  rapidly  back  to  the  former  crossing,  to  fa- 
cilitate which  the  general  made  a  detail,  and  carried 
down  six  large  flat-bottomed  boats,  each  capable  of 
carrying  one  hundred  men.  A  portion  of  the  army 
recrossed  that  evening,  and  the  remainder  next 
morning. 


MORE    DISCONTENT.  65 

Here  the  army  found  themselves  again  upon  the 
Texas  side  of  the  river,  and  their  faces  fairly  turned 
towards  home,  after  getting  in  sight  of  the  enemy 
and  not  fighting  him.  With  a  large  majority  of 
the  men,  strong  discontent  was  manifested  by  this 
last  attempt  to  run  them  home  against  their  will 
and  the  interest  and  honour  of  the  country.  Some- 
thing more  was  necessary  to  be  done  to  appease 
this  discontent  and  satisfy  the  men  in  following 
him  home,  and  Captain  Hays  was  then  despatched 
with  his  company  into  the  city  with  this  order,  "  to 
demand  of  the  alcalde  five  thousand  dollars,  or  that 
he,  the  general,  would  sack  the  town."  This  order 
was  delivered  to  the  alcalde,  when  he  returned  to 
the  camp  with  Captain  Hays,  bringing  with  him 
three  hundred  and  eighty  dollars,  saying  he  had  no 
more.  Did  General  S.  thus  carry  out  his  word, 
which,  however  proper  or  improper  it  was  for  him 
to  have  made  it,  as  a  Texian  general  he  was  bound 
to  execute  ?  No  !  and  his  reply  to  the  alcalde  was 
so  ridiculous  we  forbear  to  name  it.  It  was  urged 
upon  those  in  his  confidence  that  still  a  brilliant 
opportunity  was  left  him  of  doing  a  signal  service ; 
that  his  force  was  sufficient  to  occupy  the  river  with 
the  boats,  while  another  portion  could  go  down  the 
river  by  land,  and  by  thus  acting  in  concert,  occupy- 
ing either  or  both  sides  at  pleasure,  the  whole  valley 
must  necessarily  submit;  and  with  such  choice  of 
positions,  his  force  would  be  more  than  equal  to 
any  enemy  on  the  river.     But  no ;  home  was  the 

I 


66 

word  !  and  after  giving  his  personal  friends  items  of 
his  intention,  thereby  allowing  them  opportunity  of 
collecting  mules,  horses,  mares,  and  colts,  which 
they  profited  by,  "  home  !  march  /"  was  the  order. 
To  secure  a  ready  acquiescence  on  the  part  of  the 
men  to  this  order,  General  Somerville  had,  the  night 
previous,  ordered  the  fleet  of  boats  to  be  sunk ;  but 
others,  to  whom  the  order  had  been  given,  know- 
ing that  his  object  was  to  destroy  all  means  of  op- 
erating against  the  enemy,  and  thereby  force  a  com- 
pliance to  his  "  home  orders,"  moved  the  boats 
some  miles  below,  and  the  general  absolutely  be- 
lieved that  the  boats  had  been  sunk  until  just  be- 
fore he  started,  when  he  was  told  that  not  one  half 
of  the  men  would  follow  him  any  longer ;  that  he, 
and  all  who  chose  so  to  do,  might  go  home,  while 
the  remainder  would  stay  and  fight  the  enemy.  The 
general  started  home  with  two  hundred  and  odd 
men,  including  his  extensive  staff,  numerous  enough 
for  a  field-marshal  of  France,  while  he  left  behind 
him  three  hundred  and  four  men  to  do  the  fighting. 
The  march  he  had  now  to  accomplish  to  Bexar 
was  far  more  difficult  than  the  one  which  had  oc- 
cupied him  seventeen  days  to  Laredo,  in  which  he 
had  used  more  than  three  hundred  beeves ;  and 
though  there  were  an  immense  number  of  beeves, 
sheep,  and  goats  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
of  the  camp,  yet  this  difficult  march  was  underta- 
ken, as  I  have  been  informed,  without  his  collect- 
ing any,  trusting  to  the  precarious  chances  of  kill- 


NEW    TACTICS.  67 

ing  a  wild  cow  or  such  game  as  good  fortune  might 
throw  in  his  way.  The  consequence  was,  his  whole 
command  came  near  starving,  many  reaching  home 
on  foot,  having  to  leave  their  horses  broken  down 
and  bogged,  the  general's  among  the  rest. 

Upon  General  Somerville's  arrival  at  home,  he 
made  an  official  communication  to  the  war  depart- 
ment of  his  doings  upon  the  Rio  Grande,  which  he 
closed  by  saying  that,  "  having  been  eleven  days 
upon  the  Rio  Grande,  he  thought  it  imprudent  to 
remain  longer,  as  the  enemy  might  concentrate." 
All  the  circumstances  of  this  disgraceful  flight  home, 
and  without  rations,  proved  that  in  this  declaration 
he  was  sincere. 

We  have  many  instances  in  the  history  of  war 
of  generals  flying  from  their  men  during  the  rage 
of  battle,  when  blood  and  death  is  calculated  to 
terrify  and  unnerve ;  and  we  have  instances  of 
men  running  off  and  leaving  their  generals  in  the 
field ;  but  this  is  the  first  instance  of  which  we 
have  any  recollection  of  a  general  going  home 
when  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  ene- 
my, and  leaving  his  men  behind  to  fight.  Some 
of  General  Somerville's  friends  have  justified  his  so 
doing  by  saying  that  he  acted  under  orders.  If  it 
be  true  that  such  were  his  orders,  it  is  most  certain 
that  those  orders  were  kept  secret  from  the  army, 
and  he  thereby  permitted  himself  to  be  made  a  tool 
of  by  the  President,  to  deceive  that  army  and  the 
country.     If  it  be  true  that  he  received  such  orders 


68  FALSE    CHARGES. 

from  the  President  as  to  break  up  the  campaign 
without  fighting  the  enemy,  why  did  his  adjutant- 
general,  Chief-justice  Hemphill,  read  to  the  army, 
day  after  day,  volumes  of  patriotic  orders  of  his 
"  glory,  honour,  and  liberty  ?"  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  received  no  such  secret  orders,  then  he  is  charge- 
able with  the  grossest  disobedience  of  public  orders, 
and  the  nation  have  a  right  to  be  redressed  there- 
for. The  late  election  for  major-general  shows 
that  the  nation  has  stamped  it  with  their  most  de- 
cided disapprobation  ;  for  out  of  some  fifteen  thou- 
sand votes,  though  General  Somerville  was  brigadier 
of  the  first  brigade,  and  a  candidate,  he  received 
some  hundred. 

It  is  again  said  by  some  who  returned  home  with 
General  Somerville,  and  who  wish  to  excuse  that 
return,  that  the  army  was  disobedient  and  unorgan- 
ized. Justice  to  the  whole  army,  and  especially  the 
gallant  men  of  Mier,  require  that  we  should  notice 
particularly  these  charges.  The  former  one  we 
have  already  shown  how  groundless ;  and  we  again 
repeat,  that  there  never  was  a  more  obedient  citi- 
zen soldiery  assembled,  in  all  things  save  in  the 
one  of  running  home  without  fighting  the  enemy. 
That  they  should  have  been  disobedient  in  this,  re- 
dounds to  their  own  and  their  country's  honour. 
If  the  charge  of  being  unorganized  was  founded  in 
justice,  whose  fault  was  it  \  Where  was  General 
Somerville,  and  what  was  he  doing  from  the  entry 
of  General  Woll  into  Bexar,  on  the  11th  of  Septem- 


GEN.  SOMERVILLE's    NEGLECT.  69 

ber,  up  to  the  middle  of  December,  when  he  left 
these  men  upon  the  Rio  Grande  1  Was  it  not  his 
duty  to  organize  and  discipline  the  troops,  and  did 
he  make  any  attempt  to  do  so  1  It  is  a  well-known 
fact  that  he  never,  on  the  first  occasion,  drilled  them, 
though  he  remained  in  Bexar  weeks,  and  the  men 
had  nothing  else  to  do.  However,  in  our  warfare, 
it  is  a  popular  mistake  that  our  citizen  soldiery 
should  understand  all  the  minutiae  of  the  regular 
army  drill.  It  is  important  that  they  should  under- 
stand how  to  keep  in  "  close  order"  and  to  " wheel 
by  column"  and  a  few  other  important  manoeuvres, 
which  may  be  taught  in  a  very  few  days.  The 
most  important  of  all  manoeuvres  we  understand  bet- 
ter than  any  other  nation  on  the  face  of  the  earth, 
and  that  is,  to  "  look  through  the  double  sights  with 
a  steady  army 

It  is  painful  to  be  under  the  necessity  to  make 
reflections  either  against  General  Somerville  or  any 
other  gentleman,  but  duty  to  the  army,  to  the  ser- 
vice, and  to  the  country  requires  us  to  say  all,  and 
perhaps  more  than  we  have  said;  and  we  surely  do 
so  without  personal  unkindness  to  any,  and  espe- 
cially General  Somerville,  whose  general  kindness 
of  disposition  and  social  habits  would  disarm  any 
one  of  such  feelings. 


70  THE   AUTHOR  APPOINTED   COMMODORE. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Colonel  Fisher  elected  Commander. — The  "Writer  appointed  Commander 
of  the  Flotilla. — Descent  of  the  Rio  Grande. — Capture  of  Carancawa 
Indians  with  a  British  Flag. — Occupation  of  Mier. — Requisition  for 
Provision. — Arrest  of  the  Alcalde. — Enemy's  Appearance. — Council  of 
War.— Order  of  Battle. 

The  twelve  hundred  men  who  had  been  at  Bex- 
ar one  month  previously,  ready  and  anxious  to  pur- 
sue and  engage  the  enemy,  were  now  reduced  down 
to  three  hundred  and  four.*  After  consultation 
with  the  officers  and  most  influential  men,  it  was 
agreed  that  Colonel  William  S.  Fisher  should  be 
elected  commander,  he  having  been  in  the  Federal 
War  with  Canales  some  two  years  before,  and 
knew  the  country  upon  the  Rio  Grande  better  than 
any  other  officer  present ;  and  that  the  army  had 
the  perfect  right  to  elect  their  commander,  is  evident 
from  the  law  of  January,  1840.  The  author  was 
appointed  to  take  command  of  the  flotilla  of  boats, 
then  numbering  six  large  barges,  each  capable  of 
transporting  125  men,  and  several  smaller  ones, 
used  as  tenders,  and  to  proceed  down  the  river 
pari  passu  with  the  land  forces,  the  land  and  river 
forces  usually  meeting  at  night.  The  lamented 
George  W.  Bonnell  and  Dr.  Richard  F.  Brennem, 
both  of  whom  had  survived  the  perils  of  the  Santa 
Fe  Expedition,  who  possessed  the  most  exalted  pa- 

*  See  Muster  Roll,  No.  I.,  in  Appendix. 


L'iiii '■mmiik. 


DESCENT  OF  THE  RIO  GRANDE.        71 

triotism,  and  who  longed  for  an  opportunity  of  re- 
taliating their  injuries  upon  the  enemy,  were  ap- 
pointed, the  former  first  lieutenant  of  the  Navy,  as 
our  flotilla  was  familiarly  called,  and  the  latter  sur- 
geon. Texas  has  met  a  heavy  loss  in  the  untimely 
end  of  these  true  patriots — they,  in  the  prime  of 
life,  were  brave  to  a  fault,  talented  and  patriotic 
upon  principle — for  the  love  of  country  and  the 
love  of  liberty.  We  shall  have  occasion  hereafter 
to  speak  more  particularly  of  the  manner  in  which 
they  met  their  end,  but  on  no  occasion  could  their 
names  be  mentioned  by  us  without  an  humble  tes- 
timonial of  respect  for  their  worth.  In  the  "  Navy" 
other  appointments  were  made,  to  wit,  command- 
ants to  each  boat,  and  Samuel  C.  Lyon  sailing- 
master  of  the  flag-boat,  which  was  known  by  the 
red  flag  at  the  mast-head,  the  same  which  we  had 
hoisted  in  Mexico  opposite  Laredo  and  Guerrero. 
Two  of  the  large  boats,  with  several  of  smaller  size, 
were  burned  for  want  of  men  to  occupy  them,  and 
the  expedition  proceeded  down  the  splendid  and 
heretofore  imperfectly-known  river  Bravo. 

In  Texas,  a  popular  opinion  has  prevailed  that 
the  Rio  Grande  was  a  rapid  stream,  full  of  shoals 
and  rocks,  subject  to  go  almost  dry  in  the  fall,  and 
fordable  at  any  point.  So  far  from  this  being  true, 
we  descended  it  at  a  low  stage  of  water — on  few 
occasions  does  it  get  lower — and  never  found  any 
place  at  which  it  could  be  forded  below  Laredo,, 
and  it  is,  indeed,  barely  fordable  there.    It  is  a  beau- 


72  THE    CHAPARRAL. 

tiful  river,  averaging  four  hundred  yards  in  width, 
with  high  bluffs  generally  on  one  side  or  the  other, 
and  the  opposite  side  always  a  fertile  bottom.  This 
river  resembles  more  the  Ohio,  when  in  boatable 
order,  than  any  we  recollect  to  have  seen,  and  is 
far  superior  for  steamboat  navigation  to  any  other 
upon  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  west  of  the  Mississippi. 
The  alluvion  upon  this  river  is  almost  exclusively 
upon  the  west  bank,  and  is  capable  of  the  highest 
state  of  cultivation ;  while  the  eastern  bank  bluffs 
down  nearly  to  the  water's  edge  with  high  and  pre- 
cipitous hills.  These  hills  are  covered  with  a  dense 
growth  of  trees  and  shrubbery,  all  bearing  thorns  in 
some  shape  or  other,  and  forms  what  is  called,  in 
the  Mexican  language,  the  Chaparral.  The  im- 
mense number  of  stock  which  has  fed  upon  these 
hills  for  many  years  having  kept  down  the  grass, 
has  caused  deep  washes,  with  such  precipitous  sides 
that  it  is  frequently  with  great  difficulty  that  caval- 
ry can  proceed,  and  therefore  makes  this  the  most 
defensible  country  for  Texian  warfare,  and  espe- 
cially the  rifle.  Both  cavalry  and  artillery  would 
be  next  to  useless  in  these  hills,  and  we  hazard  no- 
thing in  saying  that,  with  the  advantage  of  the  wa- 
ter, stock,  and  contiguity  to  the  towns  and  settle- 
ments upon  the  western  bank,  one  thousand  Tex- 
ians  could  occupy  it  in  perfect  security  against  ten 
times  their  number.  This  river  and  the  adjacent 
country  were  viewed,  as  well  by  the  author  as  oth- 
ers in  the  expedition,  with  a  military  eye,  in  expec- 


CAPTURE    OF    CARANCAWA   INDIANS.  73 

tation  of  future  campaigns ;  and  we  may  congratu- 
late our  country  that  she  is  now  in  possession  of 
information  which,  in  such  an  event,  will  make  her 
strength  five  times  as  available. 

The  flotilla  proceeded  down  the  river,  capturing 
and  burning  between  forty  and  fifty  boats,  and  stop- 
ping at  different  settlements  for  provision  sufficient 
for  the  troops ;  and  we  assert,  from  positive  knowl- 
edge, that  no  unnecessary  waste  was  either  allowed 
or  perpetrated  by  the  destruction  of  any  stock  more 
than  was  necessary  or  barely  sufficient  as  rations. 
The  only  waste  which  could  not  be  prevented  was 
by  our  horses  when  turned  into  the  cornfields.  The 
corn  had  been  cut  and  stacked,  and  during  the  night 
the  horses  may  have  pulled  down  more  than  they 
ate,  but  this  must  have  been  inconsiderable.  The 
first  night  after  our  separation  from  the  home  troops, 
the  boats  stopped  at  a  rancho,  where  we  met  the 
tribe  of  Carancawa  Indians,  who  had  just  previous- 
ly to  that  time  committed  some  depredations  upon 
our  coast  about  Live  Oak  Point,  and  fled  for  fear 
of  punishment.  These  Indians  protested  their  in- 
nocence, pretended  great  friendship  for  us,  and  ex- 
pressed a  desire  to  return  to  Texas.  It  was  thought 
prudent  to  disarm  them  to  prevent  their  joining  the 
enemy,  and  all  their  implements  of  war,  quivers, 
bows,  arrows,  &c,  and  with  them  a  British  flag, 
which  they  doubtless  pilfered  from  some  English 
vessel  on  the  coast,  were  taken  and  placed  in  the 
boats. 

K 


74  OCCUPATION    OF   MIER. 

A  company  of  spies  were  constantly  kept  on  the 
western  side  of  the  river  as  a  watch  upon  the  ene- 
my, which  the  facility  of  crossing  furnished  by  the 
boats  made  entirely  practicable.  As  the  different 
boats  were  governed  by  signals  from  the  flag-boat, 
it  was  easy  to  direct  their  movements  for  this  or 
any  other  purpose. 

On  the  21st  of  December,  both  the  land  and  river 
forces  encamped  together  upon  the  east  bank  of  the 
river,  about  seven  miles  from  the  city  of  Mier, 
when  Colonel  Benjamin  M'Cullough  and  some 
choice  spies  were  despatched  to  reconnoitre  the 
city,  and  ascertain  if  any  troops  were  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, their  strength,  &c.  Colonel  M'Cullough 
went  into  the  city,  conferred  with  the  alcalde  and 
some  Americans  living  there,  who  informed  him  that 
Canales  had  just  before  evacuated  the  place,  but  that 
more  troops  were  expected  hourly.  On  the  morn- 
ing of  the  22d,  after  a  council  of  war,  it  was  deter- 
mined to  march  into  the  city  and  make  a  requisition 
upon  the  authorities  for  necessaries  for  the  army,  and 
that  in  no  instance  would  anything  like  plunder  be 
countenanced.  So,  after  detailing  a  sufficient  camp- 
guard,  the  troops  were  crossed  over  about  9  o'clock 
A.M.,  and  addressed  by  Colonel  Fisher  in  an  ap- 
propriate manner.  He  called  upon  them  to  bear  in 
mind  "  that  they  were  upon  an  honourable  service, 
and  not  one  of  pillage,  and  that  their  country  would 
look  to  them  for  a  soldier-like  discharge  of  that  ser- 
vice ;"  "  that  they  had  before  them  the  recent  plun- 


REQUISITION    FOR    PROVISIONS.  75 

der  of  Laredo,  and  the  ill  effects  of  that  plunder ; 
a  plunder  calculated  to  unfit  a  soldier  in  his  duty, 
and  to  create  anxious  desires  to  go  home."  It  is  a 
singular  fact  in  our  physical  constitution,  that  if  we 
become  loaded  with  gains  either  justly  or  unjustly, 
whether  these  gains  be  in  the  way  of  a  caballada  or 
baby -clothes,  it  increases  a  home  desire  to  such  an 
extent  that  none  can  resist  it.  In  the  fresh  exam- 
ple of  Laredo  and  Guerrero,  it  was  manifest  that 
in  the  few  who  indulged  this  way,  their  amor  patrice 
was  lost  sight  of  in  their  multiplied  excuses  to  go 
home,  for  it  is  certain  that  they  did  go  home.  The 
troops  responded  to  these  sentiments  as  men  and 
patriots  who  had  a  more  exalted  object  in  view, 
and  they  were  marched  into  the  public  square  and 
kept  under  arms  without  even  attempting  to  violate 
orders  in  a  single  particular.  The  alcalde  and  prin- 
cipal men  of  the  town  invited  Colonel  Fisher  and 
the  author  to  the  city  hall,  where  they  were  inform- 
ed that  we  wished  a  requisition  of  necessaries  to  be 
furnished  to  the  army  ;  that  so  soon  as  this  was 
done  the  troops  would  withdraw,  and  then  the  citi- 
zens had  nothing  to  fear  from  them.  The  alcalde 
expressed  his  willingness  to  comply  in  furnishing  all 
necessaries  for  the  army,  and  remarked  that  "  he  had 
it  to  do  for  the  Mexican  army,  and  could  not  expect 
to  do  less  for  us."  Colonel  Fisher  requested  me  to 
make  out  the  requisition,  which  I  did.  The  fol- 
lowing is  a  copy  of  the  same  : 

"  The  alcalde  of  Mier  will  forthwith  furnish  and 


76  ARREST    OF    THE    ALCALDE. 

deliver  at  headquarters  upon  the  Rio  Grande  the 
following  requisition  for  the  use  of  the  army,  to 
wit :  All  the  government  stores  of  every  kind,  in- 
cluding cannon,  small  fire-arms,  powder,  lead,  mu- 
nitions of  war  of  every  kind,  tobacco,  &c. ;  also,  5 
days'  rations  for  1200  men,  to  wit :  40  sacks  of  flour 
of  6  arrobas  each,  1200  lbs.  sugar,  600  lbs.  coffee, 
200  pairs  of  strong  coarse  shoes,  100  pair  of  do. 
pantaloons,  and  100  blankets. 

"  By  order  of  the  general  commanding,"  &c. 
As  is  customary  in  cases  of  this  kind,  when  a 
requisition  is  made  upon  the  alcalde  of  a  Mexican 
town,  he  apportions  it  among  the  different  citizens 
in  proportion  to  their  ability  to  furnish,  and  they 
had  nearly  complied  with  the  whole  requisition, 
when  the  difficulty  of  transporting  it  to  camp  that 
evening  presented  itself,  owing  to  there  being  no 
teams  in  readiness.  Night  was  drawing  near,  and 
to  return  to  camp  without  the  requisition,  and  with- 
out any  guarantee  of  its  forthcoming,  would  have 
been  placing  undue  confidence  in  a  Mexican's  word. 
Under  this  state  of  things,  Colonel  Fisher  ordered 
the  writer  to  take  the  alcalde  to  camp  as  a  hostage 
to  its  fulfilment,  which  he  promised  should  meet  us 
the  next  day  lower  down  the  river,  and  opposite  the 
town.  Accordingly,  the  march  was  recommenced 
in  perfect  order,  the  alcalde  being  mounted  and  un- 
der a  special  guard.  Here  was  a  town,  the  largest 
and  richest  upon  the  river  save  Matamoras,  in  our 
possession  all  day  without  the  least  possible  depre- 


HIS    APPREHENSIONS.  77 

dation  being  committed  ;  and  we  think  it  a  sufficient 
answer,  as  well  to  President  Houston's  charge  of 
robbery  against  the  Mier  men,  as  to  those  who  re- 
turned home  with  General  Somerville.  At  any  rate, 
we  will  not  dignify  this  malicious  falsehood  by  any 
farther  refutation. 

The  advance  reached  the  river  about  dusk,  when 
a  melancholy  incident  occurred  by  the  accidental 
discharge  of  a  gun,  and  the  killing  one  of  the  small- 
est boys  in  the  army.  This  youth,  by  the  name  of 
Yocum,  aged  fourteen  years,  was  one  of  the  very 
few  troops  we  had  from  the  county  of  Liberty,  was 
in  a  high  degree  manly  for  his  age,  and  deserved  a 
better  fate. 

The  army  recrossed  the  river  to  their  camp,  which 
was  upon  the  second  bottom  above  the  landing.  The 
alcalde  was  exceedingly  anxious  to  go  up  and  see  the 
commanding  general,  and  arrange  with  him,  for  he 
yet  believed  that  the  troops  which  entered  Mier 
were  but  the  advance  guard  of  the  army,  and  that 
the  remaining  portion  of  the  twelve  hundred  were  in 
camp.  The  writer  informed  him  that  he  was  un- 
der his  special  charge,  that  he  had  his  orders  what 
to  do,  and  that  he  must  be  content  until  the  requi- 
sition was  complied  with.  He  said  that  "  the  re- 
quisition would  doubtless  be  down  by  the  morrow, 
as  such  were  his  orders.',  After  eating  a  piece  of 
mutton,  which  we  insisted  he  should  join  us  in,  we 
gave  him  part  of  our  blanket,  and,  as  the  most  re- 
spectful mode  of  guarding  his  honour,  for  he  was  a 


78  COMMODORE    "  VERDE." 

far  more  decent  man  than  the  majority  of  Mexican 
officials,  we  gently  placed  one  of  his  legs  between 
ours,  and  though  there  was  no  community  of  lan- 
guage between  us,  yet  we  seemed  to  understand 
each  other's  motions,  for  when  one  turned  over  the 
other  turned,  we  always  maintaining  his  leg  in  the 
same  affectionate  position.  The  night  blew  a  heart- 
less norther,  which  swept  down  the  river  with  a 
most  cutting  effect,  and  the  morning  opened  upon 
the  most  haggard  countenance  of  Don  Juan,  for  no 
less  a  personage  was  the  alcalde. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d  the  camp  was  moved 
several  miles  below,  to  where  the  alcalde  informed 
us  the  provision  would  be  brought.  That  day  pass- 
ed without  his  promise  being  fulfilled,  and  he  grew 
exceedingly  restless.  On  the  night  of  the  23d  the 
norther  continued  to  blow,  and  we  again  had  the 
mutual  honour  of  sleeping  with  each  other  in  the 
same  affectionate  manner — we  with  Don  Juan,  and 
Don  Juan  with  (as  he  called  us)  Commodore  Verde, 
which  means,  in  their  language,  green.  Don  Juan, 
not  knowing  what  the  non-compliance  of  his  order 
as  to  the  provisions  would  bring  about,  grew  still 
more  restiff.  His  dreams  were  anything  but  pleas- 
ant, if  we  were  to  judge  from  his  nervous  excitabil- 
ity, and  sleeping  exclamations  of  halters  and  bullets. 
His  restlessness,  together  with  the  cold  weather  and 
the  want  of  more  blankets,  failed  to  inspire  us  "with 
visions  of  an  apple  and  a  bee,"  which  his  wayward 
namesake  brought  to  the  downy  pillowT  of  the  fair 


SPIES   CAPTURED.  79 

Dudu,  and  I  arose  in  the  morning  much  worried  by 
my  courtly  protection  of  his  honour  Don  Juan  the 
younger. 

Captain  Baker  and  his  spy  company  had  been 
kept  upon  the  west  side  of  the  river  during  this 
time,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  25th  captured  a 
Mexican  and  sent  him  into  camp,  who,  upon  being 
examined,  informed  our  commander,  that  after  the 
requisition  had  been  started  down  in  compliance 
with  the  alcalde's  order,  the  troops  of  General  Am- 
pudia  and  Canales  had  arrived  and  stopped  them; 
that  they  numbered  about  seven  hundred  men,  with 
two  field-pieces,  and  had  taken  a  position  upon  the 
west  bank  of  the  river  two  miles  below,  to  prevent 
our  farther  progress  down.  Upon  the  receipt  of 
this  information  a  council  of  war  was  held,  when 
it  was  unanimously  agreed  to  cross  the  river  and 
fight  them.  Our  troops  commenced  crossing  about 
2  o'clock  P.M.,  Captain  Baker  and  his  spies  in  ad- 
vance. At  4  o'clock  all  was  crossed  over  and  ready 
to  march,  when  a  brisk  fire  was  heard  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  enemy's  position.  In  a  few  minutes  a 
courier  arrived  from  Captain  Baker,  stating  that 
two  of  his  most  efficient  spies  had  been  captured, 
Samuel  H.  Walker,  of  Galveston,  and  Patrick  Lusk, 
of  Washington,  and  that  he  was  in  a  position  which 
he  would  endeavour  to  maintain  until  he  could  be 
succoured.  Upon  the  receipt  of  this  information  a 
forced  march  was  ordered  to  his  relief,  and  upon 
our  arrival  in  sight  of  the  enemy  they  retreated 


80  COWARDICE    OF    THE    ALCALDE. 

rapidly  in  the  direction  of  the  city.  Walker  had 
proved  himself  a  daring  and  efficient  spy  when 
General  Woll  occupied  Bexar.  After  he  was 
brought  a  prisoner  into  Mier,  he  was  examined 
by  General  Ampudia  as  to  our  numbers,  intentions, 
&c,  and  told  in  advance  by  the  general  "  that  if 
he  told  him  a  falsehood  his  life  should  pay  the  for- 
feit of  it."  Walker  replied  "  that  his  life  was  in 
the  general's  hands,  but  that  it  was  neither  our 
habit  or  nationality  to  lie."  After  Walker's  telling 
him  that  our  effective  remaining  force  was  about 
300  men,  General  A.  says,  "They  surely  have  not 
the  audacity  to  pursue  and  attack  me  in  town." 
"  Yes,  general,"  says  Walker,  "  you  need  not  have 
any  doubts  upon  that  point ;  they  will  pursue  and 

attack  you  in ." 

After  the  council  of  war  had  determined  upon 
crossing  and  fighting  the  enemy,  the  writer  returned 
to  the  boats  to  prepare  for  their  embarcation.  Here 
he  found  the  alcalde  asleep,  and  the  most  of  the 
boats'  hands  cooking  their  beef  and  mutton.  The 
surplus  small  boats  were  fired,  and  most  of  the  troops 
crossed  over  before  the  alcalde  awoke.  He  arose 
in  the  greatest  possible  alarm,  asking  what  all  this 
meant.  He  was  told  that  General  Ampudia  and 
Canales  had  stopped  our  rations,  and  we  were  go- 
ing to  see  by  what  authority  they  did  so.  He  pro- 
tested that,  inasmuch  as  he  had  complied  all  in  his 
power,  they  ought  not  to  carry  him  into  battle  ; 
that  he  had  a  dear  wife  and  children  at  home.    We 


PURSUIT    OF    THE    ENEMY.  81 

told  him  that  during  the  battle  he  could  stand  be- 
hind us,  and  that  there  was  not  so  much  danger 
there.  This  provoked  a  laugh  at  the  expense  of 
the  poor  alcalde,  but  did  not  make  his  countenance 
less  dolorous.  The  writer,  with  a  portion  of  his 
boat-hands,  occupied  the  extreme  right,  among 
whom  the  alcalde  was  marched  in  file.  Upon  the 
retreat  of  the  enemy  to  the  city  there  was  but  one 
general  impulse  throughout  the  line,  and  that  was  to 
pursue  and  fight  them,  they  having  that  day  and 
the  day  previous  taken  five  of  our  men  who  were 
believed  to  be  in  the  city.  Our  march  was  pursued 
in  the  direction  of  the  city,  and  about  one  mile 
therefrom  we  were  hailed  by  a  picket-guard,  which 
fired  into  us  and  fled.  This  fire  was  answered  by 
all  the  other  sentinels  in  the  neighbourhood,  giving 
us  a  good  opportunity  to  ascertain  their  position. 
Seven  o'clock  found  us  in  midnight  darkness  upon 
a  high  hill  on  the  east  side  of  the  Rio  Alcantra, 
which  separated  us  from  the  city,  and  here  com- 
menced the  battle  of  Mier. 

L 


82  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

BATTLE  OF  MIER. 

The  Rio  Alcantra  is  a  small  but  rapid  stream, 
about  sixty  yards  in  width,  Which  forms  a  semicir- 
cle upon  the  east  side  of  Mier,  the  city  being  built 
in  the  curve.  The  position  which  our  troops  oc- 
cupied was  upon  a  high  hill,  difficult  of  descent,  and 
between  the  upper  and  lower  crossings  of  the  river. 
Here  it  was  necessary  to  feel  our  way  with  great 
caution  and  profound  silence.  The  night  being 
dark  and  drizzling  with  rain,  the  troops  were  or- 
dered to  sit  and  protect  their  arms  from  the  damp 
until  more  could  be  learned  of  the  position  of  the 
enemy.  While  in  this  position,  Captain  Charles 
K.  Reese,  of  the  Brazoria  company,  with  private 
Joseph  Berry,  was  despatched  from  the  left  wing  to 
fire  into  a  picket-guard  some  two  hundred  yards  to 
their  left,  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  their  fire  and 
exposing  the  situation  of  their  different  pickets, 
while  the  author  felt  his  way  down  the  bluff  in  the 
direction  of  the  lower  ford.  Here  was  stationed  a 
strong  force  of  their  cavalry  to  defend  this  crossing, 
which  he  ascertained  by  the  rattling  of  the  cavalry 
gear  when  the  horses  would  shake  themselves.  He 
returned  to  the  position  of  our  army  upon  the  hill, 
and  obtained  permission  of  Colonel  Fisher  to  take 
Captain  Baker's  spy  company  and  some  of  the  boat- 


■ues- . 
Ai-tillerj 


TexiaTL    Camp 
/y\AAA 

the  Bio  Grande 


(  THJEJTEXIAN  ,CAHIP  > 

December  25^A  26t,.,  1842  .      ' 


"F*.ti  y  A.  by  W  ..Kemble ,  "N  .  Y 


82  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

BATTLE  OF  MIER. 

The  Rio  Alcantra  is  a  small  but  rapid  stream, 
about  sixty  yards  in  width,  Which  forms  a  semicir- 
cle upon  the  east  side  of  Mier,  the  city  being  built 
in  the  curve.  The  position  which  our  troops  oc- 
cupied was  upon  a  high  hill,  difficult  of  descent,  and 
between  the  upper  and  lower  crossings  of  the  river. 
Here  it  was  necessary  to  feel  our  way  with  great 
caution  and  profound  silence.  The  night  being 
dark  and  drizzling  with  rain,  the  troops  were  or- 
dered to  sit  and  protect  their  arms  from  the  damp 
until  more  could  be  learned  of  the  position  of  the 
enemy.  While  in  this  position,  Captain  Charles 
K.  Reese,  of  the  Brazoria  company,  with  private 
Joseph  Berry,  was  despatched  from  the  left  wing  to 
fire  into  a  picket-guard  some  two  hundred  yards  to 
their  left,  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  their  fire  and 
exposing  the  situation  of  their  different  pickets, 
while  the  author  felt  his  way  down  the  bluff  in  the 
direction  of  the  lower  ford.  Here  was  stationed  a 
strong  force  of  their  cavalry  to  defend  this  crossing, 
which  he  ascertained  by  the  rattling  of  the  cavalry 
gear  when  the  horses  would  shake  themselves.  He 
returned  to  the  position  of  our  army  upon  the  hill, 
and  obtained  permission  of  Colonel  Fisher  to  take 
Captain  Baker's  spy  company  and  some  of  the  boat- 


HII 


MM 
I11R 


rtntl 


T 

rn 

IT 

T 

o  |c 

IP1.AZA 


i  I 


Ifcruan 
.lrlill.ru 

n  n  11 

, 

f- 

E 

1 

«S 


A  Ric/ht  iruic,. 

B     Copt,  Cameron's  position  . 

C    Rerje  ,.£  Pearson!*  companies. 

D    JHuch  of  Jlu/lit  iri/ig  on  Artilleij 

Alcalde   Offio. 
f    Cliurcli  &  GiAmpuduw'  quart 


*»^      [    -I  JoeMews  Gua/d 


L_ 

B    a 

_1 

M  IT  MM 

:Capt  Baker's  Company 


of  Que   Eo  Grande- 


(  (THE  TEXIAM   CAMP^ 

December  ZS^A  26*  1 8- 1 


Eag?    by    W.Ke Bible      X'     5 


ARVEll      &     RUOTIIKKS.      SEW    YORK. 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  83 

men,  among  whom  was  the  lamented  Dr.  Brennem, 
and  thus  open  a  scattering  lire  upon  the  cavalry  he- 
low,  while  he  could  hunt  out  a  crossing  into  the 
city  between  the  two  fords.  Selecting  a  position 
for  these  men,  protected  by  an  embankment  about 
three  feet  high,  immediately  opposite  the  cavalry, 
with  the  river  only  between  them,  the  signal  to 
commence  the  action  was  to  be  nine  shots  from 
his  repeating  rifle.  The  writer  stepped  to  the 
water's  edge  and  fired  the  nine  shots  in  rapid  suc- 
cession into  the  enemy,  which  created  some  confu- 
sion in  their  lines,  but  was  promptly  returned,  none 
of  their' s  taking  effect.  The  spy  company  and  boat- 
men kept  up  the  fire,  which  completely  deluded  the 
enemy,  for  they  thought  it  was  our  main  body  which 
intended  to  force  that  passage.  The  opposite  plan 
of  Mier  and  its  vicinity,  the  Texian  camp,  and  their 
entrance  into  the  city,  will  give  the  reader  a  more 
correct  knowledge  of  the  battle. 

While  this  fire  was  kept  up  with  galling  effect 
upon  the  enemy,  I  passed  up  the  river  to  hunt  out 
an  intermediate  crossing.  Feeling  my  way  along 
the  almost  perpendicular  bluff  of  the  river,  I  found 
a  place  which  could  be  descended  with  difficulty. 
Here  I  hung  up  a  pocket-handkerchief  upon  a  bush 
to  designate  the  spot,  while  I  returned  and  led 
the  army  down.  In  returning  to  the  line,  some  de- 
lay was  occasioned  by  the  following  unfortunate 
circumstance :  Captains  Reese  and  Berry,  after 
firing  into  the  picket  upon  our  left,  in  attempting  to 


84  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

make  their  retreat,  the  latter  fell  down  a  precipice 
about  thirty  feet  and  broke  his  thigh.  Dr.  Sinnick- 
son  and  a  guard  of  seven  men  were  detailed  for  his 
assistance,  who  had  to  let  down  ropes,  which  he 
fastened  around  his  body,  by  which  means  they 
drew  him  out  and  placed  him  in  a  house  near  by, 
where  his  wound  could  be  attended  to.  We  shall 
have  occasion  to  speak  of  this  small  guard  in  de- 
tailing one  of  the  most  desperate  and  bloody  con- 
flicts which  they  had  the  next  day  with  the  enemy, 
and  which  the  history  of  war  can  hardly  parallel. 

After  this  detail  was  made,  the  army  followed  me, 
in  the  most  profound  silence,  to  where  the  hand- 
kerchief was  left,  and  then,  in  single  file,  slided  down 
the  bluff  about  forty  feet  to  the  water's  edge,  it  be- 
ing too  perpendicular  to  walk  down.  We  then 
passed  up  the  river  some  hundred  yards  ;  the  alcalde, 
being  near  the  head  of  the  line,  was  several  times 
asked  whether  the  river  could  be  here  forded,  and 
his  answer  was  "  Poco  mas  arriba"  (a  little  higher 
up).  The  cavalry  below,  being  at  this  time  severe- 
ly galled  by  our  spies  and  boatmen,  were  firing  at 
random,  and  here  we  had  two  men,  Allen  and  Oats, 
wrounded.  The  anxiety  which  Don  Juan  seemed 
to  evince  in  getting  out  of  the  reach  of  the  cavalry 
shots  made  us  suspect  him  of  falsehood  as  to  the 
depth  of  the  river.  At  any  rate,  I  determined  to  as- 
certain the  practicability  of  crossing  by  first  trying 
it  in  person.  The  head  of  the  line  was  halted  for 
this  purpose,  and,  after  wading  through  the  rapids, 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  85 

I  was  greatly  rejoiced  to  find  it  not  more  than  waist 
deep.  Returning  with  this  favourable  report,  Col- 
onel Fisher  and  myself  headed  the  line  and  effected 
the  crossing  with  the  same  silence  which  had  been 
previously  preserved,  and  which  was  greatly  favour- 
ed by  the  roaring  of  the  river  at  this  point  among 
the  rocks. 

I  had  been  appointed  to  the  command  of  the 
right  wing,  and  by  the  time  the  extreme  left  was 
across  the  river,  the  right  was  in  immediate  con- 
tact with  a  picket  of  the  enemy,  about  fifteen  or 
twenty  strong.  The  constant  fire  below,  which 
had  been  kept  up  between  our  spies  and  their  cav- 
alry, had  so  diverted  the  attention  of  this  picket, 
that  they  did  not  discover  us  until  we  were  almost 
touching,  when  the  whole  of  them,  in  the  greatest 
possible  alarm,  simultaneously  hailed  us.  They  re- 
ceived for  answer  to  their  "quien  viva?"  "Let  them 
have  it,  boys  !"  when  about  one  hundred  shots  from 
the  right  wing  were  poured  into  them.  They  never 
returned  the  fire,  or  ever  kicked  that  we  know  of, 
and  the  only  thing  now  to  break  the  silence,  save 
the  firing  down  the  river,  was  the  thundering  voice 
of  old  Colonel  Ramires,  some  few  hundred  yards 
off,  commanding  the  cavalry  to  charge  us ;  but  this 
order  was  given  in  vain.  During  this  incident, 
which  happened  in  less  time  than  we  have  been 
relating  it,  the  alcalde,  favoured  by  the  darkness 
of  the  night,  fled.  He  had  been  placed  in  special 
charge  of  one  of  the  boat-hands,  the  old  sailing- 


86  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

master,  a  braver  or  better  man  than  whom  did  not 
belong  to  the  army  ;  but  his  English  blood  had 
been  aroused  by  the  "  quien  viva1  of  the  picket, 
and  he  had  let  them  have  the  full  benefit  of  his 
double-barrelled  "  Joe  Manton."  So  soon  as  the  re- 
port of  our  firing  ceased,  I  spoke  to  the  old  sailing- 
master  to  look  to  the  alcalde,  and  received  for  an- 
swer, "  By  my  soul,  general,  he  is  adrift !" 

We  were  now  fairly  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city, 
and  marching  in  the  direction  of  the  Military 
Square,  which  we  had  little  doubt  was  the  strong- 
hold of  the  enemy.  About  fifty  yards  from  the 
picket  we  entered  a  street  at  right  angles,  down 
which  an  officer,  mounted  and  in  full  gallop,  was 
passing.  As  he  passed  the  head  of  our  line,  some 
dozen  shots  were  fired  at  him,  with  what  effect  we 
do  not  know ;  his  horse  floundered,  and  passed  out 
of  our  immediate  path.  The  head  of  the  line  wTas 
wheeled  to  the  right,  up  the  street  from  whence 
this  officer  came,  and  proceeding  about  one  hun- 
dred yards  farther,  it  was  necessary  to  reconnoitre 
the  position  of  the  enemy.  Here  a  halt  was  order- 
ed, when  I  passed  the  next  corner  upon  our  left, 
which  opened  upon  a  street  that  led  directly  into 
the  square,  and  in  which  street  was  placed  their 
artillery,  around  which  a  bustling  preparation  was 
making.  Returning  to  the  line,  I  informed  Colonel 
Fisher  of  the  exact  position  of  the  enemy,  and  ob- 
tained his  permission  to  advance  with  the  head  of 
the  right  wing  until  it  covered  the  street  in  which 


BATTLE    OF   MIER.  87 

the  artillery  was  placed,  when  we  fired  suddenly 
into  them,  passed  the  corner  in  quick  time  to  make 
room  for  their  "  grape  and  canister,"  and  repeated 
the  fire  alternately  with  them.  This  was  done 
several  times  with  deadly  effect  upon  the  enemy, 
while  twice  per  minute  their  grape  and  canister 
shot  would  pour  down  the  street,  from  whence  our 
fire  proceeded,  with  no  effect  upon  us,  we  after  each 
fire  passing  the  corner  to  await  theirs,  and  then  re- 
turning to  reoccupy  the  firing  position  again.  By 
this  manoeuvre,  while  their  artillery  was  playing 
upon  a  vacant  street,  our  fire  was  sure  and  destruc- 
tive. While  the  right  wing  was  thus  occupied,  the 
left  unfortunately  exposed  their  situation  by  return- 
ing some  random  shots  fired  from  the  house-tops. 
This  brought  upon  them  a  well-directed  fire,  which 
killed  J.  E.  Jones,  a  brave  and  honourable  man,  an 
Englishman  by  birth,  who  had  been  one  of  the  Santa 
Fe  sufferers. 

The  night  continued  to  drizzle  rain,  which  made 
it  more  important  that  our  troops  should  effect  a 
lodgment  in  some  strong  stone  houses,  as  well  to 
protect  their  arms  as  to  refix  those  already  out  of 
order,  some  of  the  men  having  fallen  in  the  water 
while  crossing  the  river.  One  of  the  strongest  ob- 
jections to  the  rifle  is  the  ease  with  which  it  is  put 
out  of  order,  and  the  difficulty  of  refixing  it ;  if  the 
powder  should  get  wet,  the  difficulty  of  unbreeching 
is  far  greater  than  the  drawing  of  a  musket-load. 

The  right  wing  was  ordered  to  take  possession 


88  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

of  a  row  of  stone  houses  upon  one  side  of  the  street, 
leading  in  the  direction  of  the  artillery,  which  they 
did  by  beating  down  the  corner  doors,  and  then, 
with  the  aid  of  an  iron  crowbar  which  they  found 
inside,  opened  breaches  through  the  dividing  walls 
to  within  fifty  yards  of  the  artillery.  A  breach  was 
ordered  to  be  made  in  the  upper  end  of  this  build- 
ing, so  as  to  command  the  artillery ;  and  no  sooner 
was  it  commenced  on  the  inside  than  the  artillery 
was  directed  against  that  point  on  the  outside.  The 
w7all  was  thick  and  strong,  and  the  twelve-pound 
shots  driving  against  it  in  rapid  succession  tended 
greatly  to  facilitate  our  work  by  loosening  the  stones 
for  us.  No  sooner  was  the  opening  made  than  it 
was  filled  with  our  rifles,  which  were  unerringly  de- 
structive. Upon  the  left  wing  was  Captain  Reese's 
Brazoria  company,  and  Captain  I.  G.  W.  Pearson's 
Milam  company.  They  had  been  ordered  to  oc- 
cupy a  row  of  stone  buildings  upon  the  opposite 
side  of  the  street,  and  had  just  completed  their  port- 
holes, where  the  cross-fire  from  their  position  was 
equally  destructive.  After  daylight,  three  times  was 
the  artillery  manned  and  as  often  silenced,  the  last 
time  sixteen  out  of  seventeen  falling,  the  command- 
er, Captain  Castro,  a  brave  and  honourable  man, 
being  the  only  surviver. 

Our  troops  had  now  effected  a  strong  lodgment 
nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  city,  and  beaten  all  op- 
position, with  only  one  killed  and  two  wounded. 
The  same  thing  could  not  have  been  done  in  day- 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  89 

light  against  such  odds  with  one  hundred  times  the 
loss.  In  less  than  one  hour  after  daylight  opened 
upon  us,  their  artillery  was  silenced  and  deserted, 
and  the  enemy  had  recourse  to  the  house-tops,  from 
whence  they  ventured  to  pour  down  upon  the 
houses  we  occupied  volleys  of  musketry.  In  the 
many  thousand  cartridges  discharged  at  us  an  oc- 
casional one  would  take  effect,  and  we  had  some 
valuable  men  killed  and  several  wounded.  In  this 
situation,  none  but  our  best  rifles  and  surest  shots 
were  brought  into  play,  and  they  not  permitted  to 
fire  except  with  dead  rest  and  sure  aim.*  This  ex- 
plains why  a  large  majority  of  their  killed  and 
wounded  were  shot  in  the  head  and  breast,  the  only 
part  exposed  in  firing  at  us.  However,  to  obtain  a 
better  position  for  some  of  our  picked  riflemen,  holes 
were  made  in  the  roofs  of  the  houses  we  occupied, 
through  which  they  ascended,  and  in  that  position 
we  soon  cleared  all  the  houses  within  reach.  Thus 
the  battle  continued  until  12  M.,  and  it  was  perfectly 
clear,  from  the  manner  in  which  their  fire  had 
slackened  in  every  quarter,  that  they  were  badly 
crippled.  One  movement  more  on  our  part  was 
necessary  to  complete  the  victory,  and  that  was  by 
commanding  the  public  square,  their  stronghold. 
To  effect  this,  a  simultaneous  movement — from  the 
house  occupied  by  the  right  wing,  upon  the  alcalde's 

*  We  might  name  many  instances  which  came  under  our  observation 
of  astonishing  marksmanship  on  the  part  of  our  men,  by  Colonel  Wm.  F. 
Wilson  and  others,  but  must  refrain  from  so  doing  for  fear  of  making 
this  report  too  prolix. 

M 


90  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

office,  about  fifty  yards  distant,  with  a  charge  of 
Captains  Reese  and  Pearson's  companies  upon  a 
corner  house  just  above  them — was  necessary.  We 
obtained  permission  of  Colonel  Fisher  to  cross  over 
to  Reese  and  Pearson's  building  and  give  the  or- 
der. The  house  which  these  companies  were  to 
occupy  was  still  in  possession  of  a  strong  body  of 
the  enemy,  and  it  was  necessary  to  make  a  charge 
upon  it  from  different  directions.  One  breach  had 
already  been  made  in  the  wall  communicating  with 
the  back  yard  of  said  house ;  and  Captain  Reese 
and  myself  ascended  a  scaffold  which  still  remained 
against  the  wall  of  a  new  house  in  our  rear,  to  re- 
connoitre the  enemy  and  see  how  that  wall  could 
be  scaled.  Here  we  were  in  the  double  danger  of 
falling  from  this  slender  scaffold,  fifteen  or  twenty 
feet  high,  as  well  as  the  fire  of  the  enemy ;  and  we 
occupied  it  but  a  moment,  when  we  were  driven 
below  by  a  shower  of  musket-balls,  fired  by  a  pla- 
toon of  the  enemy  at  not  more  than  forty  yards'  dis- 
tance, which  made  the  splinters  fly  thick  about  us. 
When  I  say  that  neither  of  us  were  touched,  it  will 
give  the  reader  a  fair  specimen  of  Mexican  marks- 
manship. We,  however,  determined  that  it  would 
be  better  to  make  farther  breaches  in  the  wall  than 
to  expose  the  men  to  the  enemy's  fire  by  ascending 
such  an  elevation.  To  make  these  breaches  re- 
quired time  ;  so  we  returned  to  Colonel  Fisher  with 
the  report,  while  measures  were  taken  to  carry  out 
the  order. 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  91 

Just  about  this  time,  private  Cody,  who  has  since 
perished  in  the  mountains,  stepped  up  to  me,  and 
said,  "  Look,  general,  yonder  is  the  almightiest  fight 
you  ever  did  see."  I  turned  in  the  direction  to 
where  he  was  pointing,  and  became  an  eyewitness 
of  one  of  the  most  thrilling  conflicts  which  the  ima- 
gination can  conceive.  The  guard  which  had  been 
left  with  Berry  the  night  previous,  upon  the  east 
side  of  the  Alcantra,  occupied  a  small  adoby  house 
about  six  hundred  yards  distant,  and  on  the  decliv- 
ity of  the  hill,  which  gave  us  a  good  view  of  their 
position.  Here  they  had  been  impatient  and  anx- 
ious spectators  of  our  battle  for  some  seventeen 
hours,  when  a  troop  of  cavalry,  about  sixty  in  num- 
ber, passed  near  their  house.  This  was  too  glorious 
an  opportunity  to  let  pass  without  their  assistance  ; 
so  their  rifles  and  double-barrelled  guns  were  brought 
to  bear  upon  them  with  most  deadly  effect,  killing 
their  commander  and  eight  or  ten  others,  when  the 
survivers  fled  in  every  direction.  In  a  very  few 
minutes  after,  several  hundred  cavalry  and  a  field- 
piece  were  brought  up.  Berry's  guard,  well  knowing 
that  their  adoby  house  could  not  withstand  the  force 
of  the  cannon-shot,  determined  at  once  to  leave  it, 
and  charge  through  the  lines  of  the  enemy  to  our 
position.  They  accordingly  charged,  and  broke 
the  enemy's  lines  with  the  most  dauntless  bravery, 
each  one  killing  his  man,  and  some  two,  for  several 
of  them  had  double-barrelled  guns.  It  was  nowr 
three  hundred  yards  to  the  river,  to   gain  which 


92  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

point  they  would  be  safe,  for  the  enemy  would  not 
venture  closer  than  that  to  our  fire.  Finding  now 
their  guns  empty  and  no  time  to  reload,  the  enemy 
pursuing  in  overwhelming  numbers,  their  only  de- 
fence was  the  butts  of  their  pieces.  The  multitude 
prevailed,  killing  James  Austin,  son  of  Captain  Hen- 
ry Austin,  of  Brazoria  county ;  Joe  Berry,  of  do. ; 
Wm  Hopson,  and  J.  Jackson,  of  Ireland,  one  of 
the  Santa  Fe  prisoners.  Richard  Kean,  of  Wash- 
ington, Dr.  J.  J.  Sinnickson,  and  D.  H.  E.  Beasley, 
of  Brazoria,  were  taken  prisoners  ;  while  Bate  Ber- 
ry and  Tom  Davis,  of  Washington,  succeeded  in 
reaching  our  houses  with  empty  guns,  and  hatless. 
To  see  the  unequal  odds  which  these  brave  men 
encountered,  without  the  power  to  succour  them, 
was  painful  and  exciting  beyond  anything  we  had 
experienced.    Poor  Berry  was  bayoneted  in  his  bed. 

After  their  cavalry  had  prevailed  over  these  eight 
men,  they  manifested  their  joy  by  the  most  antic 
capers.  They  went  through  every  evolution  which 
is  not  in  the  books  ;  they  fired  guns,  shouted,  and 
blew  their  trumpets  long  and  loud,  always  taking 
care  not  to  approach  within  four  hundred  yards  of 
our  rifles. 

About  this  time  a  column  of  the  enemy  charged 
down  a  street  upon  the  north  of  the  building  we 
occupied.  Colonel  Fisher  being  at  that  point,  threw 
himself,  with  some  twenty  men,  suddenly  into  the 
street,  received  their  fire,  which  severely  wounded 
several  of  his  men,  cutting  off,  also,  the  ball  of  his 


BATTLE    OF   M1ER.  93 

right  thumb.  They  effectually  returned  their  fire, 
when  the  party  fled.  Up  to  this  time,  for  the  last 
six  hours,  the  artillery  nearest  us  had  been  silenced, 
and  no  one  of  the  enemy  dared  approach  it.  It 
had  already,  as  we  were  afterward  told,  proved  the 
death  of  fifty-five  out  of  their  sixty  choice  artillery 
company.  To  get  it  out  of  our  reach,  they  had  re- 
course to  throwing  a  lasso  over  it  from  behind  a 
corner,  and  dragging  it  off,  in  which  they  were 
more  successful  than  in  roping  the  steamboat  Yel- 
low Stone,  as  she  passed  down  the  Brasos  River  in 
1836 :  this  caused  a  yell  of  exultation  from  their 
troops.  Just  about  this  time  they  were  blowing  a 
charge  in  different  directions.  The  writer  was  in 
the  upper  end  of  the  buildings  nearest  the  square, 
when  he  received  information  that  Colonel  Fisher 
was  wounded:  hastening  to  where  he  was,  he  found 
him  vomiting  from  the  effects  of  his  wound.*     The 

*  The  effect  of  this  wound  upon  Colonel  Fisher  was  that  of  deadly- 
nausea,  which  produced  vomiting.  Such,  however,  is  usually  the  effect 
of  gunshot  wounds  upon  the  nerves,  which,  unlike  those  from  the  sword 
or  knife,  show  a  fall  of  countenance  and  a  corresponding  depression  of 
spirits.  This  physiological  fact  has  been  remarked,  and  I  have  often  been 
struck  with  the  truth  of  the  following  remarks  of  Lord  Byron,  in  the  fifth 
note  to  the  "  Giaour."  He  says  :  "  It  is  to  be  remarked,  in  cases  of  vi- 
olent, deaths  by  gunshot  wounds,  the  expression  is  always  that  of  languor, 
whatever  the  natural  energy  of  the  sufferer's  character ;  but  in  death 
from  a  stab,  the  countenance  preserves  its  traits  of  feeling  or  ferocity, 
and  the  mind  its  bias  to  the  last." 

It  has  been  said  by  some  of  Colonel  Fannin's  warmest  friends,  who  sur- 
vived the  bloody  butchery  of  Goliad,  that  after  he  received  his  wound  at 
the  battle  of  Coletto,  his  spirits  sank  under  it,  which  had  an  undue  influ- 
ence upon  the  surrender.  I  am  clearly  of  opinion  that  in  future  the  ad- 
vice of  a  wounded  commander  should  be  received  with  great  caution,  if 
at  all. 


94  BATTLE    OF   MIER. 

lamented  Captain  Cameron  and  his  gallant  compa- 
ny had  occupied,  during  the  battle,  a  yard  in  the 
rear  of  our  buildings.  This  yard  had  a  low  stone 
wall  around  it,  which  they  had  bravely  defended, 
and  from  which  they  had  done  effectual  execution. 
Here  Cameron  had  seven  men  wounded  and  three 
killed,  who  had  been  brought  inside  the  buildings. 
During  this  time,  when  the  expected  charge  was 
looked  for,  Cameron  came  in  under  much  excite- 
ment, and  asked  for  a  re-enforcement  to  defend  his 
position.  For  the  first  time,  here  something  like 
a  confusion  took  place.  Many  were  talking,  and 
each  one  had  his  plan  of  defence,  and  the  voice  of 
each  was  drowned  in  the  cabal.  This  was  a  criti- 
cal moment.  It  was  the  first  occasion  which  seem- 
ed to  demand  our  whole  united  strength,  for  previ- 
ously the  picked  riflemen  had  principally  been  in 
requisition.  In  this  state  of  things,  I  mounted  a 
table  and  commanded  silence  in  the  most  peremp- 
tory tone,  ordered  a  sufficent  force  to  Cameron's 
position,  and  appointed  the  remaining  force  to  the 
defence  of  the  buildings.  Suddenly,  from  a  tempo- 
rary confusion,  no  men  ever  behaved  better.  Each 
man  went  cheerfully  to  the  post  assigned  him,  with- 
out murmuring  or  the  obtrusion  of  his  farther  opin- 
ion, and  at  this  identical  time  they  were  in  a  better 
situation  and  temper  to  make  effectual  resistance 
than  at  any  moment  previous,  for  now  they  seemed 
more  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  it,  when  a 
white  flag  approached  from  a  street  leading  east. 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  95 

At  this  juncture,  in  the  midst  of  victory,  we  date 
our  misfortunes. 

Dr.  Sinnickson,  who,  of  the  eight,  had  been  taken 
prisoner  over  the  Alcantra,  having  been  brought 
to  General  Ampudia's  headquarters,  was  put  upon 
his  examination  as  to  our  force,  &c. ;  it,  however, 
fully  corroborated  Walker's  statement.  In  Gen- 
eral Ampudia's  staff,  as  surgeon-general,  was  Dr. 
Humphries,  a  Scotchman  by  birth,  formerly  sur- 
geon in  the  Texian  army.  In  1838  he  was  tried 
by  the  District  Court  of  Brazoria  county  for  the 
murder  of  Joseph  Powell,  from  whence  he  broke 
jail,  and  made  his  escape  to  Matamoras,  where  he 
has  since  practised  his  profession.  The  surgeon- 
general  knew  Dr.  Sinnickson  in  Brazoria,  and  as 
soon  as  he  communicated  the  fact  to  the  Mexican 
officers,  the  cunning  Canales  and  Carasco  suggest- 
ed, as  a  last  alternative,  that  their  old  deception  of 
a  white  flag  should  be  tried  upon  us.  At  this  time, 
so  badly  were  they  whipped,  that  we  were  told  by 
Walker,  Lusk,  and  the  others  of  our  men  who  were 
prisoners,  and  were  tied  at  the  general's  headquar- 
ters, that  the  officers'  horses  were  saddled,  and  held 
each  by  the  bridle,  and  that  the  gate  of  the  church- 
yard upon  the  Matamoras  road  was  opened,  and  every 
preparation  was  being  made  for  a  flight,  when  Dr. 
Sinnickson  was  started  to  us  with  the  white  flag. 
Walker  and  others,  who  had  been  prisoners  since 
the  day  previous,  had  witnessed  the  battle  from 
where   they   were   confined,  knew  the  enemy  was 


96  BATTLE    OF   MIER. 

badly  beaten,  and  knew  their  condition  too  well  for 
either  of  them  to  be  sent  in  to  us.  Dr.  Sinnicksor? 
having  just  been  taken  prisoner,  and  knowing  but 
little  of  the  condition  of  the  enemy,  had  no  chance 
to  communicate  with  the  other  prisoners,  and  on 
this  account,  as  well  as  from  his  being  surgeon  in 
our  army,  he  was  selected  to  bring  in  the  flag  to  us. 
At  the  time  he  started  with  the  flag,  the  other  pris- 
oners believed  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  asking 
terms  from  us,  nor  were  they  undeceived  in  this 
particular  until  they  saw  a  portion  of  our  men 
marching  into  the  public  square  to  lay  down  their 
arms. 

Dr.  Sinnickson  was  ordered  by  General  Ampudia 
to  say  to  the  Texian  commander  "that  he  had 
1700  regular  troops  in  the  city,  and  800  fresh  troops 
near  by  from  Monterey,  which  would  be  up  in  a 
few  minutes ;  that  it  was  useless  for  him  to  contend 
longer  against  such  odds,  and  that,  if  he  would  sur- 
render his  forces,  they  should  be  treated  with  all  the 
honours  and  considerations  of  prisoners  of  war ; 
that  the  Santa  Fe  prisoners  should  be  treated  so 
likewise,  and  that  our  men  should  not  be  sent  to 
Mexico,  but  kept  upon  the  frontier  until  an  ex- 
change or  pacification  were  effected ;  and  that,  if 
these  terms  were  not  acceded  to,  we  should  be  al- 
lowed no  quarter." 

While  the  white  jlag  approached  from  the  east, 
a  column  of  the  enemy's  infantry  advanced  from  the 
west,  evidently  with  the  intention  of  getting  some 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  97 

advantage  over  us  under  the  protection  of  the  flag. 
By  the  time  the  flag  reached  Colonel  Fisher,  and 
before  any  communication  could  have  been  received 
from  the  bearer,  the  head  of  the  column  had  ap- 
proached within  a  few  feet  of  the  building  where  I 
was  at  that  time.  They  approached  without  their 
arms  being  reversed,  and  in  a  hostile  attitude,  when 
I  ordered  a  man  at  my  side  to  shoot  the  foremost, 
which  was  promptly  done.  The  next  two  shots  I 
fired  from  my  repeating  rifle  with  equally  good 
effect,  when  the  remainder  of  the  column  dodged 
around  a  stone  wall  to  their  right.  Our  recollec- 
tion is  that  these  were  the  last  two  shots  fired,  and 
certain  it  is  they  were  the  last  two  which  my  faith- 
ful gun  fired. 

Some  few  moments  elapsed  between  Dr.  Sin- 
nickson's  first  communication  with  Colonel  Fisher 
and  the  astounding  information  which  was  commu- 
nicated to  our  men,  that  it  was  a  demand  for  us  to 
surrender,  for  up  to  this  time  a  general  impression 
prevailed  that  they  were  asking  terms  of  us.  When 
this  information  was  communicated  to  our  men,  it 
was  promptly  met  by  a  general  burst  of  disapproba- 
tion, "  that  they  never  would  surrender  their  arms." 
The  Mexican  officers,  who  had  been  watching  the 
reception  which  the  white  flag  met,  saw  that  it  was 
still  detained,  and  some  discussion  going  on  near  it, 
and  without  any  invitation  or  understanding  upon 
our  part,  took  occasion  to  slip  clandestinely  into  our 
ranks  from  a  direction  different  from  that  in  which 

N 


98  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

the  flag  had  come.  The  officers  who  had  thus,  like 
spies,  obtruded  themselves  into  our  lines  without 
our  permission,  were  General  De  la  Vega,  Colo- 
nels Carasco,  Blanco,  and  one  other,  and  the  priest 
of  Comargo,  Padre  De  Lire.  These  officers,  who 
had  thus  unwarrantably  introduced  themselves 
among  us,  saluted  Colonel  Fisher  (several  of  whom 
were  previously  acquainted  with  him  in  the  Federal 
War)  with  their  hypocritical  Mexican  hug,  calling 
him  their  dear  friend,  and  pledging  the  straps  upon 
their  shoulders,  with  all  the  sanctity  of  honour  and 
candour,  that  General  Ampudia's  terms  would  be 
fully  carried  out ;  the  priest  of  Comargo,  at  the 
same  time,  pledging  the  holy  Catholic  religion  to 
this  observance,  and  in  his  fervency  at  deception, 
says  to  Colonel  Fisher,  with  uplifted  eyes,  "  My  dear 
son,  do  not  throw  yourself  away."  During  the 
Federal  War  Colonel  Fisher  had  been  confined  at 
Comargo  with  the  smallpox,  when  this  priest  ad- 
ministered extreme  unction  to  him,  for  which  reason 
he  doubtless  took  the  liberty  of  so  familiar  an  ad- 
dress. I  believed  then,  as  I  do  now,  and  have  done 
since  the  murder  of  Colonel  Fannin  and  his  four 
hundred,  that  no  confidence  could  be  placed  in  a 
Mexican's  word.  That  these  officers  had  forfeited 
their  lives  by  introducing  themselves  as  spies  into 
our  camp,  and  to  let  them  return  with  their  knowl- 
edge of  our  strength,  situation,  &c,  would  prove 
ruinous  to  us.  My  first  impulse,  under  these  re- 
flections, was  to  shoot  them  for  thus  introducing 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  99 

themselves  into  our  lines,  and  for,  as  it  appeared 
to  me,  this  most  novel  and  unprecedented  attempt 
to  gull  us  into  a  surrender.  Acting  under  this  im- 
pression, I  quickly  brought  my  repeating  rifle  to 
bear  upon  them,  when  Captain  William  Ryan 
jumped  before  me,  knocked  it  up,  and  begged  that 
I  would  hold  until  more  could  be  known  of  their 
propositions  and  intentions.  They  continued,  in 
the  most  fervent  manner,  to  pledge  their  good  faith 
to  Colonel  Fisher,  Captain  Eastland,  and  some 
others  of  our  officers,  who  were  talking  with  them, 
when  I  ordered  Captain  Cameron  to  form  his  com- 
pany near  by,  and  be  in  readiness  for  farther  orders, 
which  he  promptly  did.  Then  stepping  up  to  Colo- 
nel Fisher,  I  requested  him  to  stand  aside,  so  that 
Cameron's  company  could  fire  into  them.  Colonel 
Fisher  peremptorily  refused  to  do  so.  I  then  re- 
quested permission  to  take  them  prisoners,  and 
march  them  unharmed,  at  the  head  of  our  column, 
to  the  camp,  upon  the  east  side  of  the  Rio  Grande, 
where,  under  any  possible  circumstances,  we  would 
be  safe.  This  was  also  refused.  Captain  Reese, 
whose  company  was  formed  some  forty  yards  still 
higher  up,  in  the  direction  of  the  square,  came  up 
and  requested  the  same  thing ;  he  was  also  refused. 
Under  these  circumstances,  these  officers  returned 
to  their  lines  with  a  full  knowledge  of  everything 
concerning  ourselves,  and  a  full  knowledge  of  all 
that  was  important  for  them  to  know  ;  granting,  be- 
fore they  departed,  one  hour  for  the  matter  to  be 
determined. 


100  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

This  hour  I  believed  of  the  most  vital  impor- 
tance. Several  of  the  officers  and  a  respectable 
minority  of  the  men  had  signified  their  willingness, 
some  avowedly,  and  others  tacitly,  to  accept  the 
terms.  I  believed  that  it  would  be  easy  to  convince 
these  men  of  their  error.  I  therefore  went  to  the 
brave  Cameron,  and  asked  him  "  if  it  was  possible 
that  he  was  in  favour  of  a  surrender."  The  bare 
mention  of  the  word  choked  him :  he  was  too  full 
for  utterance ;  but,  taking  me  by  the  hand,  he  car- 
ried me  into  the  building  where  our  wounded  were. 
Here  he  had  seven  of  his  old  company,  who  had 
followed  him  for  three  years  through  many  dangers 
and*  hard-fought  battles.  Most  of  these  men  called 
upon  us  not  to  leave  them  in  language  which  would 
have  wrung  tears  from  hearts  of  stone.  Some  im- 
plored us,  for  mercy's  sake,  to  blow  out  their  brains, 
and  ease  them  of  their  misery ;  while  there  were 
some,  more  iron-nerved  than  the  rest,  who  rolled 
out  withering  imprecations  upon  the  enemy,  and 
called  upon  us,  for  the  honour  of  our  country,  never 
to  surrender.  One  of  these  brave  fellows,  whose 
thigh  was  broken,  called  me  to  him,  and  drew  from 
his  belt  a  pair  of  silver-mounted  pistols,  which  he 
placed  in  my  hand,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  saying, 
"  General,  this  is  all  I  can  do  for  you  now'9*  This 
scene  was  distressing  beyond  any  power  of  utter- 
ance. Our  twenty-three  wounded,  some  with  bro- 
ken limbs,  others  shot  through  the  body,  and  one  poor 
fellow  with  both  eyes  shot  out,  lay  scattered  over 

*  This  was  young  Bobo,  of  South  Carolina. 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  101 

the  floor,  interspersed  with  the  dead,  presenting  a 
scene  calculated  to  excite  one's  deepest  sympathies 
over  all  other  feelings.  Cameron  said,  "  General, 
what  would  you  do  V  My  answer  was,  "  Men,  if 
by  staying  with  you  we  could  ease  your  pains  or 
heal  your  wounds,  the  sooner  my  voice  would  be  to 
remain ;  but  you  will  have  your  own  physician,  and 
will  doubtless  be  treated  as  well  by  our  going  as  if 
we  were  to  remain  and  surrender,  for  even  then  we 
would  be  separated."  We  passed  out  of  the  house, 
and  I  immediately  sought  the  gallant  Captain  Ryan, 
of  the  Fort  Bend  company.  He  informed  me  that 
most  of  his  company  were  for  fighting  it  out ;  and 
while  in  conversation  with  him,  Cameron  returned, 
and  in  a  voice  of  harsh  determination,  which  his 
Highland  Scotch  accent  rendered  peculiarly  im- 
pressive, said,  "  By  God,  general,  me  and  the  whole 
of  my  company  will  go  it !"  To  the  lasting  credit 
of  Captains  Reese  and  Pearson's  companies,  the 
whole  of  them,  to  a  man,  were  opposed  to  surren- 
der. Thus  was  the  hour  spent  by  myself,  Captains 
Cameron,  Ryan,  Reese,  Pearson,  Buster,  Dr.  Bren- 
nem,  Judge  Gibson,  and  others,  in  explaining  to  the 
men  the  entire  practicability  of  marching  in  close 
order  to  where  we  the  night  before  crossed  the 
Alcantra,  which  was  within  three  hundred  yards, 
thence  down  the  right  bank  about  two  miles  to  the 
Rio  Grande,  and  so  up  the  same  to  our  camp.  I 
informed  the  men  "  that  under  no  possible  circum- 
stances could  we  lose  more  than  fifty,  and  that  our 


102  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

probable  loss  would  not  exceed  twenty  ;  for  the  pre- 
cipitous right  bank  of  the  Alcantra  would  protect 
us  from  any  cavalry  charge,  while  we  had  nothing 
to  fear  from  the  infantry  in  a  country  so  broken  and 
so  suited  to  our  rifles ;  that  I  would  head  them  in  this 
attempt,  and  would  pledge  my  life  upon  the  result." 
The  hour  was  about  to  close,  when  Colonel  Fisher 
requested  me  to  accompany  him  to  General  Ampu- 
dia's  headquarters.  Having  from  the  first  opposed 
the  whole  of  their  terms,  my  opposition  had  increas- 
ed as  I  reflected  upon  the  frequent  times  that  we 
had  been  cheated  by  their  cursed  ivhitejlag,  and  I 
refused  so  to  do.  He  went  alone,  where  he  remain- 
ed some  fifty  minutes.  Good  use  was  made  of  this 
time  by  those  who  were  in  favour  of  fighting  it  out ; 
and  when  Colonel  Fisher  returned,  I  do  not  believe 
that  there  exceeded  twenty  who  were  willing  to 
surrender. 

Colonel  Fisher  formed  the  different  companies  in 
the  street  to  communicate  the  result  of  his  interview 
with  the  Mexican  commander,  which  was  a  reiter- 
ation of  his  former  promises,  and  he  concluded  by 
saying  that  "I  have  known  General  Ampudia  for 
years — know  him  to  be  an  honourable  man,  and 
will  vouch  for  his  carrying  them  out ;  that  if  you 
are  willing  to  accept  these  terms,  you  will  march 
into  the  public  square  and  give  up  your  arms,  or 
prepare  for  battle  in  H\e  minutes ;  that,  in  any  view 
of  the  case,  your  situation  is  a  gloomy  one,  for  you 
cannot  fight  your  way  out  of  this  place  to  the  Rio 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  103 

Grande  short  of  a  loss  of  two  thirds,  or  perhaps  the 
whole ;  but  if  you  are  determined  to  fight,  I  will  be 
with  you,  and  sell  my  life  as  dear  as  possible." 
This  speech  was  a  deathblow  to  all  farther  pros- 
pect of  fighting,  for  it  at  once  determined  half  of 
the  men  to  surrender,  who  instantly  separated  from 
the  remainder,  and  moved  off  in  the  direction  of 
the  square.  Among  these  were  many  of  our  oldest 
and  most  respectable  fellow-citizens,  and  several 
who  had  heretofore  stood  deservedly  high. 

Now  a  scene  commenced  which  defies  descrip- 
tion. In  the  countenances  of  those  whom  Colonel 
Fisher's  speech  did  not  induce  to  surrender,  were 
disappointment,  sorrow,  rage  :  many  shed  tears, 
some  swore,  while  others  maintained  a  sullen  de- 
termination, which  showed  that  they  were  prepared 
for  the  worst.  Those  who  marched  off  with  the 
intention  of  surrendering  showed  in  their  coun- 
tenances that  they  believed  the  act  would  pur- 
chase their  lives.  They  did  not  pass  Reese  and 
Pearson's  companies,  which  were  still  formed  and 
nearest  the  square,  without  a  shower  of  impreca- 
tions upon  their  heads.  "  Go !"  says  one.  "  I  hope 
you  may  never  enjoy  the  sight  of  your  country  and 

liberty  again  !"      "Go,"  says  another,  "you  

cowards !  and  rot  in  chains  and  slavery ;"  and  such 
like  anathemas,  which,  from  their  solemn  truths, 
seemed  to  fall  heavy  upon  their  spirits,  for  they  re- 
turned no  answer,  but  marched  into  captivity  in  si- 
lent obedience.     In  a  feeling  of  rage  and  contempt 


104  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

which  I  was  far  from  controlling,  I  pursued  this 
party  several  steps,  determined  to  exhaust  the  last 
shot  of  my  repeater  upon  them,  and  take  the  con- 
sequences. Here  I  was  met  by  an  old  friend,  whose 
head  was  frosted  by  seventy  years.  He  addressed 
me  in  a  tone  of  feeling  and  friendship,  which  dis- 
armed me  of  my  intention,  but  possessed  me  of 
another  feeling  which  absorbed  my  whole  soul.  I 
believed  that  we  would  be  sacrificed,  felt  that  I 
could  stand  it,  and  longed  to  see  whether  the  oth- 
ers could.  Under  this  feeling,  I  broke  my  arms 
upon  the  pavement,  and  said  to  them,  "Now  we 
will  see  who  can  stand  shooting  the  best."  In  a  few 
minutes  I  went  into  the  square,  where  I  found  a 
group  of  officers  in  front  of  several  companies  of 
infantry.  Among  this  group  was  the  Mexican  sur- 
geon-general, Dr.  Humphries,  who  knew  me  in  Tex- 
as :  he  advanced  and  spoke  to  me  cordially.  I  asked 
him  to  show  me  General  Ampudia,  which  he  did. 
Unhooking  my  naked  sword-belt,  I  advanced  and 
delivered  it  to  him,  announcing  myself  at  the  same 
time.  I  remarked  to  him,  that,  "  having  opposed  the 
surrender  in  vain,  I  was  prepared  either  for  the  prison 
or  to  be  shot,  and  was  perfectly  indifferent  in  the 
choice."  He  received  me  kindly,  and  replied  that 
"  he  appreciated  the  feelings  of  the  brave,  but  mine 
was  the  fate  of  war ;  that  his  house  and  friendship 
were  mine,  and  that  he  hoped  I  would  consider  my- 
self his  guest,  and  call  upon  him  freely  for  any  ser- 
vice in  his  power."     I  thanked  him  for  his  personal 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  105 

good  feelings,  and  turned  to  look  for  the  party  who 
had  preceded  me,  and  found  their  rifles  laid  out  in 
a  row  upon  the  ground,  and  two  or  three  officers 
counting  their  catskin  and  tiger-tailed  pouches  with 
an  indifference  which  showed  they  knew  nothing 
of  their  value.  This  was  a  melancholy  sight,  from 
which  I  was  relieved  by  some  one  calling  to  me 
from  the  iron  grating  of  a  window  about  forty  yards 
distant.  I  approached  the  window,  and  found  about 
one  hundred  of  our  men  jammed  into  a  small,  filthy 
room ;  and  the  man  who  was  calling  to  me  wished 
me  to  "  keep  an  eye  upon  the  disposition  of  their 
arms,  for,"  said  he,  "  we  find  too  late  that  you  were 
right,  and  if  we  can  get  hold  of  our  'tools  once 
more,  we  will  go  it  with  a  looseness."  Thus  soon 
did  their  repentance  commence,  and  long  will  it  con- 
tinue. 

The  balance  of  our  men,  as  their  arms  were  de- 
livered up,  were  thrust  into  two  other  rooms,  each 
distant  from  the  other  sixty  or  eighty  steps.  Gen- 
eral Ampudia  invited  Colonel  Fisher  and  myself  to 
his  headquarters  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  square, 
adjoining  the  church.  In  this  room  was  seated  at 
a  table  the  cunning  Canales,  drawing  up  the  "  Arti- 
cles of  Capitulation,"  which  were  soon  after  impo- 
sed on  us  for  what  they  did  not  contain.  On  the 
floor,  writhing  in  death-agonies,  was  the  unfortunate 
Colonel  Arsinal,  adjutant-general  of  the  enemy's 
forces.  "  There,"  said  General  Ampudia,  with  tears 
in  his  eyes,  "  is  my  son,  the  hope  of  the  army,  the 

O 


106  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

pride  of  the  service.  He  has  a  death-shot  through 
the  kidneys,  and  must  soon  die."  We  replied  that 
"  it  was  the  fate  of  war,  and  the  brave  in  all  ranks 
share  our  sympathy."  This  accomplished  and  un- 
fortunate young  officer  was  only  twenty-six  years 
of  age,  highly  favoured  by  nature  in  his  personal 
appearance,  and  had  attained  his  elevated  rank 
through  wonderful  proficiency  in  his  profession. 

While  Canales  was  basely  engaged  in  writing  the 
articles  of  capitulation,  General  Ampudia  had  Col- 
onel Fisher  and  myself  served  with  coffee  and  choc- 
olate, which  were  the  more  grateful,  as  we  had  been 
since  the  previous  morning  without  refreshment.  In 
the  mean  time  the  articles  of  capitulation  were  sign- 
ed by  General  Ampudia,  and  his  interpreter,  by  the 
name  of  Alderette,  formerly  a  citizen  of  Victoria 
county,  was  called  in  to  read  them.  The  following 
is  a  literal  translation  from  the  original : 

"  Camp  of  the  Army  of  the  North,  > 
1st  Division.  \ 

"  Agreeable  to  the  conference  I  had  with  General 
William  S.  Fisher,  I  have  decided  to  grant, 

"  1st.  That  all  who  will  give  up  their  arms  will 
be  treated  with  the  consideration  which  is  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  magnanimous  Mexican  nation. 

"  2d.  That  conformably  to  the  petition  which  the 
said  General  Fisher  has  made  to  me,  all  persons  be- 
longing to  the  Santa  Fe  Expedition  will  receive  the 
same  treatment  and  guarantees  as  the  rest. 

"  3d.  All  who  desire  to  avail  themselves  of  these 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  107 

terms  will   enter  the  square  and  there  deliver  up 
their  arms.  Pedro  d'Ampudia." 

When  the  interpreter  read  the  first  article,  the 
words  "  with  the  consideration  ivhich  is  in  accordance 
with  the  magnanimous  Mexican  nation"  were  studi- 
ously rendered  "  with  all  the  honour  and  considera- 
tion of  prisoners  ofivar"  These  latter  words  com- 
prehended everything  we  had  a  right  to  claim ;  but, 
always  doubting  Mexican  treachery,  I  suggested  to 
Colonel  Fisher  if  it  would  not  be  better  for  us  to 
have  our  interpreter.  He  replied  that,  though  he 
did  not  speak  the  language,  he  could  read  and  trans- 
late it ;  and,  after  looking  over  the  paper,  he  made 
no  objection  to  it.  At  the  door  we  found  several 
of  our  captains  waiting  to  hear  the  articles  read. 
The  interpreter  then  read  them  as  he  had  done  to 
us,  which  also  satisfied  them. 

The  aggregate  number  of  Texians  engaged  in  the 
battle  were  two  hundred  and  sixty-one,  our  loss 
being  ten  killed,  twenty-three  badly,  and  several 
slightly  wounded.* 

The  aggregate  number  of  the  Mexican  forces  en- 
gaged were  twenty- three  hundred  and  forty,  com- 
posed of  the  Zapadores  battalion,  the  Yucatan  regi- 
ment, a  portion  of  each  of  the  seventh  and  twelfth 
regiments,  and  the  artillery  company  of  sixty  men — 
regulars,  in  all  twelve  hundred  and  forty ;  also  eight 
hundred  mounted  defensors,  under  Colonel  Canales, 

*  See  Appendix  No.  I. 


108  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

and  not  less  than  three  hundred  citizens  in  and 
about  Mier.*  Their  loss  was  between  seven  and 
eight  hundred  killed  and  wounded.  The  Mexican 
report  of  their  loss  on  the  evening  of  the  surrender 
was  four  hundred  and  thirty  killed  and  two  hundred 
and  thirty  wounded.  Canales,  in  his  official  de- 
spatch, in  avoiding  the  truth,  says,  "As  every  great 
good  costs  dear,  the  streets  and  gutters  of  Mier  over- 
flowed with  valiant  Mexican  blood."  All  their  offi- 
cers that  I  conversed  with  admitted  their  loss  to  be 
rising  of  seven  hundred.  It  is  certain  that  only  four 
hundred  and  sixty  regulars  marched  back  to  Mata- 
moras,  myself  and  other  officers  counting  them  ev- 
ery day  between  Mier  and  that  city  ;  and  I  am  in- 
formed by  Dr.  Sinnickson  that  none  but  killed  and 
wounded  were  left  behind.  The  regulars  were  so 
thinned  that  General  Ampudia  did  not  think  them 
a  sufficient  guard  for  our  two  hundred  and  twenty- 
six  prisoners,  our  wounded  being  left  behind ;  and 
he  required  Canales  with  his  mounted  defensors,  all 
of  whom  belonged  to  the  upper  towns,  to  accom- 
pany them.  The  loss  of  their  cavalry  must  have 
been  considerable  at  the  lower  ford,  while  those 
who  attacked  Joseph  Berry's  guard  could  not  have 
been  less  than  twenty.  We  were  informed  at  Mat- 
amoras  by  the  United  States  consul  and  several 
American  and  English  gentlemen,  who  had  it  in 

*  The  enemy's  force  has  been  variously  estimated  from  twenty-seven 
hundred  to  thirty  three  hundred  ;  but  I  have  adopted  an  estimate  still 
smaller,  and  one  that  I  know  to  be  under  the  mark. 


BATTLE    OF    MIER.  109 

confidence  from  the  Mexican  officers,  that  their  loss 
exceeded  eight  hundred  in  killed  and  wounded. 
Their  official  report  to  the  war  department  of  the 
amount  of  ammunition  expended  in  the  battle  was 
nine  hundred  cannon  cartridges  and  forty-three 
thousand  musket  cartridges,  besides  three  hundred 
rockets,  &c,  while  ours  was  between  fourteen  and 
fifteen  hundred  of  every  description.  There  never 
has  existed  in  any  age  a  nation  who  understood  so 
well  as  the  Texians  this  important  matter,  "  never 
to  shoot  without  killing ;"  and  this  will  explain  why 
a  larger  proportion  than  one  to  two  of  our  shots 
took  effect  in  this  battle. 

With  the  permission  of  General  Ampudia,  I  visit- 
ed the  church  that  evening  to  see  our  wounded,  and 
carried  them  a  quantity  of  bandages.  Doctors  Sin- 
nickson,  Brennem,  and  Shepherd  were  then  attend- 
ing them.  All  appeared  to  be  cheerful,  though  most 
of  them  were  badly,  and  several  mortally  wounded. 
I  have  never  yet  seen  a  calamity  so  great  befall 
Texians  as  to  prevent  their  making  fun  ;  and  upon 
inquiry  how  they  were  off  for  rations,  they  replied, 
"  Oh  !  we  have  plenty  of  brains,  general."  In  the 
same  building,  one  hundred  and  thirty-six  of  the 
enemy's  wounded  were  stretched  out  on  the  floor, 
many  of  whom  had  been  shot  in  the  head,  and  their 
brains  had  oozed  out,  from  the  size  of  a  marble  to 
that  of  one's  fist.  It  was  a  horrible  sight,  but  will 
explain  what  our  fun-making  wounded  meant. 

The  enemy  were  mostly  wounded  in  the  head 


110  BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

and  breast,  a  large  portion  of  whom  died  the  first 
night.  From  many  observations,  I  find  that  the  la- 
cerating effect  of  the  rifle  ball  is  far  more  dangerous 
than  the  smooth  bore  ;  and  that  the  wound  of  a  rifle 
ball  carrying  eighty  to  one  hundred  per  pound  is 
more  dangerous,  both  from  the  lacerating  effect  the 
former  has  upon  the  flesh,  and  the  small  orifice  it 
makes,  which  is  insufficient  to  discharge  the  blood, 
and,  consequently,  the  patient  bleeds  inwardly. 

The  evening  after  the  battle  Colonel  Fisher  ad- 
dressed the  following  note  to  General  Ampudia : 

"  Mier,  Dec.  26th,  1842. 

"  Sir, — The  forces  which,  through  the  chances 
of  war,  I  now  surrender  to  you,  are  composed  of 
the  most  valiant  and  intelligent  citizens  of  Texas. 
They  have  contended  manfully  against  your  supe- 
rior force,  and  have  yielded  only  when  it  was  deem- 
ed folly  longer  to  contend. 

"  Your  well-established  character  as  a  brave  and 
magnanimous  officer  is  a  certain  guarantee  to  me 
that  they  will  be  treated  as  brave  men  deserve  to  be. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be  most  respectfully  yours, 
"  Wm.  S.  Fisher,  commanding. 

"  To  General  Pedro  d'Ampudia,  commanding  Mexican  army." 

Thus  ended  the  battle  of  Mier,  the  best  fought 
of  any  during  the  revolution.  To  the  brave  men 
who  justly  won  it,  their  inglorious  surrender  proved 
a  sore  defeat ;  but  in  all  the  moral  and  political  con- 
sequences of  this  battle  to  Texas,  a  glorious  tri- 
umph ! 


RESULTS  OF  THE  BATTLE  OF  MIER.     Ill 

We  repeat  that  the  battle  of  Mier,  in  its  moral 
and  political  consequences  to  our  country,  was  a 
glorious  triumph.  It  was  there  that  the  people  of 
Texas  demonstrated  the  entire  practicability  of  con- 
quering and  holding  that  rich  valley  against  im- 
mense odds.  It  was  there  that  the  people  of  Tex- 
as pursued  and  fought  them  nine  to  one,  killing 
treble  their  own  numbers,  and  proving  themselves 
invincible  to  everything  but  duplicity  and  treach- 
ery ;  and  it  was  there  that  the  Texian  made  the 
name  of  his  rifle  and  death  synonymous  terms 
throughout  Mexico.  Far  from  being  of  the  least 
political  advantage  to  Texas  is  the  geographical 
knowledge  acquired  by  our  countrymen,  both  of  the 
Valley  of  the  Rio  Grande  and  the  situation  of  its 
towns,  the  river  and  mountain  passes,  and  its  defen- 
sible positions. 

Though  the  survivers  of  the  Mier  men  have  suf- 
fered all  the  horrors  of  multiplied  deaths,  and  many 
of  their  brave  companions  have  gone  to  their  eter- 
nal homes  in  all  the  agonies  of  human  suffering,  yet 
it  was  a  tribute  they  freely  rendered  to  their  coun- 
try's honour  and  liberty.  It  is  for  that  country  to 
say  whether  it  shall  prove  a  burnt-offering  or  a  pos- 
itive good. 


112  THE    WHITE    FLAG. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

White  Flag. — Dr.  Sinnickson's  Statement. — Cavalry  sent  after  our  Camp- 
guard. — Camp-guard  Escapes. — Major  BonnePs  Death. — Return  of  Cav- 
alry.— Preparation  to  march  for  Matamoras. — Dr.  Sinnickson  left  in 
Charge  of  our  Wounded. — Their  Treatment  and  Escape. — March  for 
Matamoras. — Suffering  of  our  Men. — Triumphal  Entry  into  Comargo. — 
Camp  in  a  Cow-pen. — The  Bull  Comedy. — Camp  in  a  Sheep-pen. — A 
new  Comedy. — Triumphal  Entry  into  Rhinosa. — Ridiculous  Show. — 
Arrival  at  Guadaloupe. — Congratulations  to  Ampudia. — Visit  of  Tom 
and  Esau. — Triumphal  Entry  into  Matamoras. — Texas  Negroes  in  Mat- 
amoras.— Our  Incarceration  in  Prison,  and  Note  to  General  Ampudia. 

Much  has  been  said  of  our  improper  surrender  at 
the  battle  of  Mier,  and  now  all  agree  that  it  was  not 
only  improper,  but  wholly  unnecessary.  The  reader 
will  therefore  see  why  it  is  that  we  have  been  seem- 
ingly tedious  in  our  report  of  that  battle.  We  have 
detailed  facts  apparently  unimportant,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  affording  opportunity  to  the  reader  to  draw 
his  own  conclusion  as  to  whom  the  wrong  was  at- 
tributable, if  to  any.  There  can  be  no  difference 
of  opinion  that  it  was  a  radical  mistake  in  not  for- 
cing the  white  flag  off  as  soon  as  its  object  was 
known.  Colonel  Fisher  says  that  he  ordered  Dr. 
Sinnickson  to  retire  with  it  seven  or  eight  times, 
and  was  not  obeyed.  Dr.  Sinnickson  is  a  gentle- 
man long  and  favourably  known  in  Texas,  and,  to 
do  him  full  justice,  we  herewith  connect  his  state- 
ment of  this  affair.  (See  Appendix  No.  IV.)  On 
the  other  hand,  it  has  been  said,  if  Colonel  Fisher, 
as  commander,  was  not  obeyed  the  first  time  that 


MISCHANCES    OF    WAR.  113 

he  ordered  the  flag  off,  he  wore  his  sword  to  little 
purpose  not  to  use  it  in  so  critical  a  juncture. 
Nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  the  whole  of 
our  command  was  both  in  better  temper  and  order 
to  make  effectual  resistance  at  this  identical  period 
than  at  any  previous  time  during  the  battle.  The 
second  grand  mistake  was  in  permitting  the  before- 
mentioned  Mexican  officers  and  the  priest  of  Co- 
margo  to  introduce  themselves  at  all  into  our  ranks, 
and  then  retire  with  a  full  knowledge  of  all  that  was 
important  to  their  success  and  our  defeat.  The 
third  grand  mistake  was  in  our  commander  vouch- 
ing for  General  Ampudia  as  a  man  of  honour,  and 
that  his  promises  would  be  carried  out,  &c.  These, 
however,  I  look  upon  as  the  mischances  of  war,  and 
believe  that  no  severer  reflection  should  be  made.  I 
have  never  questioned  the  personal  bravery  of  those 
who  advocated  the  surrender,  and  certain  it  is  that 
those  who  have  expressed  doubts  upon  this  subject 
are  not  justified  in  so  doing  by  a  life  of  boldness,  es- 
pecially in  Colonel  Fisher,  which  has  signalized  him 
among  the  foremost  in  our  revolution. 

The  evening  after  the  battle,  General  Ampudia 
informed  Colonel  Fisher  and  myself  that  he  would 
send  his  cavalry  out  to  our  camp  upon  the  east  side 
of  the  Rio  Grande  to  bring  in  the  balance  of  our 
men,  horses,  camp  furniture,  &c. ;  and,  to  prevent 
the  farther  effusion  of  blood,  he  would  advise  us  to 
write  to  the  men  in  camp  to  surrender  and  come  in. 
We  replied  that  we  were  prisoners,  and  they  were 

P 


114        ESCAPE  OF  THE  CAMP-GUARD. 

free;  we  could  not,  therefore,  undertake  to  give  such 
advice.  I  requested  permission  of  the  general  for 
one  of  our  men  to  accompany  the  cavalry,  and  to 
secure  my  baggage,  the  most  important  part  of  which 
was  my  journal,  and  manuscript  maps  of  the  roads, 
rivers,  and  the  parts  of  the  country  through  which 
we  had  travelled.  Having  obtained  the  permission 
asked  for,  I  sent  Sailing-master  Lyon,  with  a  know- 
ing wink,  to  our  boys  in  camp.  The  cavalry  ap- 
proached the  river  to  within  a  few  hundred  yards, 
halted,  and  sent  Lyon  and  a  few  men  to  "  Halloo 
across,  and  order  our  men  to  bring  over  the  boats  /" 
Lyon  being  an  indifferent  Spanish,  and  the  Mexi- 
cans with  him  worse  English  scholars,  anglicized 
the  above  order  thus  :  "  Boys,  we  are  all  prisoners, 
and  several  hundred  cavalry  are  close  by  in  pursuit  of 
you.  Take  all  the  good  horses  and  put !"  This  ad- 
vice was  promptly  acted  upon,  and  all  our  camp- 
guard  reached  home  in  safety,  with  the  exception 
of  our  lamented  countryman,  Major  George  W. 
Bonnel. 

Major  Bonnel,  than  whom  Texas  did  not  possess 
a  purer  patriot  or  braver  man,  in  company  with  Dr. 
Watson  and  Mr.  Hackstaff,  when  the  army  crossed 
the  river  the  day  previous  to  attack  General  Ampu- 
dia,  then  a  mile  below,  were  cooking  our  dinner, 
which  consisted  of  a  fat  sheep,  with  a  stick  run 
through  it,  the  ends  of  which  rested  upon  the  sides 
of  a  large  canoe,  with  the  fire  in  its  bottom.  We 
expected  to  have  warm  work  with  Ampudia,  and 


DEATH   OF   MAJOR   BONNEL.  115 

ordered  these  gentlemen  to  float  the  canoe  down 
opposite  the  battle-ground,  hitch  it  to  a  bush,  come 
up,  take  a  hand,  and  then  we  could  relish  our  din- 
ner the  better.  As  we  have  before  explained,  when 
we  arrived  in  sight  of  the  Mexican  army,  they  re- 
treated to  the  city  at  right  angles  from  the  river, 
leaving  my  friends  and  my  dinner  behind,  they  hav- 
ing no  alternative  then  but  to  join  the  camp-guard. 
After  the  latter  retreated,  as  Lyon  advised  them, 
some  miles,  Major  Bonnel  and  one  other  man  re- 
turned to  camp  for  more  of  our  horses,  and  was 
captured.  Poor  Bonnel  was  murdered,  as  his  com- 
panion reported,  who  made  his  escape.  Major  B. 
was  not  only  constitutionally  brave,  but,  being  a 
Santa  Fe  prisoner,  he  was  doubtless  stimulated  to 
a  more  obstinate  resistance,  which  could  neither 
prevail  over  numbers,  nor  was  calculated  to  inspire 
their  savage  breasts  with  magnanimity  for  such  he- 
roism. Thus  fell  a  brave  man  and  a  pure  patriot, 
without  the  last  sad  rites  of  burial.  His  bones  now 
lie  bleaching  upon  the  banks  of  Rio  del  Norte.  His 
spirit,  if  congenial  spirits  meet  in  heaven,  will  hold 
glorious  communion  with  those  of  Milam  and  Trav- 
is, of  Fannin,  Grant,  and  Ward,  of  Bowie,  Crock- 
et, Brennem,  Fitzgerald,  and  a  host  of  other  heroes 
who  fell  in  the  same  struggle  for  liberty. 

On  the  evening  of  the  27th,  the  cavalry  which 
had  been  despatched  to  bring  in  our  camp-guard 
returned  with  320  of  our  most  indifferent  horses 
and  mules,  and  a  quantity  of  rubbish,  consisting  of 


116       PREPARATIONS  FOR  MARCHING 

old  saddles,  empty  saddlebags,  blankets,  &c.  Cap- 
tain Alderette,  the  officer  who  had  been  sent  in 
charge  of  the  cavalry,  as  an  excuse  for  not  bringing 
in  our  camp-guard,  represented  them  to  be  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  strong,  and  that  they  had  retreated 
upon  the  best  horses.  General  Ampudia  expressed 
surprise  that  our  men  had  not  surrendered,  and  came 
in  and  informed  Colonel  Fisher  and  myself  what  the 
officer  had  said  about  their  number.  We  answered 
that  it  was  not  in  the  history  of  our  nation  to  sur- 
render without  fighting,  and  that  the  officer  had 
told  him  a  falsehood  to  screen  himself  for  not  fight- 
ing them.  We  informed  General  A.  at  the  same 
time  that  our  camp-guard  were  well  apprized  of  our 
fate,  and  had  selected  all  our  fine  American  horses, 
and  it  would  be  idle  to  pursue  them.  He,  however, 
started  Colonel  Carasco,  with  six  hundred  cavalry, 
in  pursuit,  who  returned  the  fourth  day  deeply  cha- 
grined to  confirm  what  we  had  said. 

Preparations  were  now  busily  making  for  the 
march  to  Matamoras.  Their  dead  were  lowered 
from  the  house-tops  by  means  of  cords,  which  oc- 
cupied all  the  day  succeeding  the  battle,  and  their 
wounded  were  billeted  about  the  town  upon  the 
citizens,  according  to  their  respective  abilities  to 
maintain  them.  Dr.  Sinnickson  was  left  in  charge 
of  our  wounded  men,  and  every  kindness  promised 
to  be  afforded  him  and  them.  From  the  doctor's 
report,  none  of  these  promises  were  carried  out,  but 
they  were,  instead,  treated  by  the  commandant  in 


MARCH    FOR    MATAMORAS.  117 

charge  of  them  in  a  most  brutal  mariner.  Some 
two  weeks  after,  eight  of  these  wounded  men  made 
their  escape  to  Texas  (see  Appendix  No.  I.),  and 
the  doctor,  with  the  balance,  were  sent  off  to  Mat- 
amoras. 

December  the  31st,  General  Ampudia  took  up  the 
line  of  march  for  Matamoras  in  the  following  order : 
Colonel  Fisher,  myself,  Adjutant  Murry,  and  our  four 
small  boys,  were  kept  with  the  general,  under  the 
special  charge  of  Captain  Clemente  Castro,  a  brave, 
honourable,  and  good  man,  who  had  so  miraculous- 
ly survived  his  artillery  company.  We  will  ever 
feel  grateful  for  the  many  kindnesses  extended  us 
by  this  officer,  and  rejoice  to  hear  of  his  promotion, 
which  he  so  well  deserved.  Our  men  were  march- 
ed in  double  file,  in  the  centre  of  the  road,  with  ar- 
tillery before  and  in  their  rear.  On  each  side  of 
them  was  a  single  file  of  infantry  with  fixed  bayo- 
nets, and  on  the  outside  of  them  were  cavalry.  In 
the  rear,  also,  a  large  body  of  cavalry  was  kept  in 
reserve.  In  this  order,  the  march  was  conducted  at 
a  rapid  pace,  without  allowing  our  men  to  stop  for 
water,  for  which  they  suffered  greatly,  not  having 
means  to  pack  it.  They,  not  being  used  to  walk- 
ing, and  having  been  shut  up  in  a  close  room  for 
the  last  five  days  previous,  suffered  greatly  with  sore 
feet  and  fatigue.  That  night  they  reached  the  Rio 
St.  Juan,  opposite  the  town  of  Comargo,  and  en- 
camped, with  but  little  fuel  ;  consequently,  they 
had  small  fires,  and  a  most  bleak  norther  blowing. 


118       MEN  MADE  A  RAREE  SHOW  OF. 

Our  men  suffered  greatly  here :  all  their  blankets, 
worth  taking,  had  been  stolen  by  the  cavalry ;  and 
when  the  fires  would  burn  down,  they,  to  keep 
themselves  warm,  would  rake  away  the  burning 
coals,  and  lay  in  piles  in  the  ashes.  We  have  fre- 
quently observed  what  an  exhilarating  influence  the 
French  language  has  upon  men  when  in  the  worst 
physical  condition.  Those  who  understood  that 
language  would  appear  happy  under  its  spirit-stir- 
ring airs,  while  our  John  Bull  natures  would  com- 
promise with  nothing  but  full  rations ;  and  I  believe 
that  there  are  patriotic  Frenchmen  who  would  keep 
as  fat  upon  a  bottle  of  claret  and  the  Marseilles 
hymn,  as  some  of  the  English  breed  would  upon  the 
hind-quarter  of  a  bullock. 

January  1st.  Our  men  were  crossed  over  the 
Rio  St.  Juan  into  the  town  of  Comargo,  which  is 
a  beautiful  place,  containing  about  three  thousand 
inhabitants,  situated  immediately  upon  the  south 
side  of  the  river,  and  six  miles  from  its  entrance 
into  the  Rio  Grande.  Here  commenced  the  grand 
menagerie  show  of  our  prisoners,  which  was  kept 
up  during  their  zigzag  march  of  fifteen  hundred 
miles  through  Mexico.  Our  men  were  marched 
through  the  town  and  around  the  military  square 
under  the  ringing  of  bells,  firing  of  crackers  and 
guns,  and  the  "vivas"  of  the  populace.  A  large 
number  of  small  children,  of  both  sexes,  carried 
round  the  town,  and  in  front  of  our  men,  long  rolls 
of  paper  pasted  together,  upon  which  were  painted 


MEN    HERDED    LIKE    CATTLE.  119 

the  most  bombastic  and  ridiculous  mottoes,  such  as 
"  Glory  and  gratitude  to  the  brave  Canales" — "  Eter- 
nal honour  to  the  immortal  Ampudia,"  &c.  Our 
men  were  placed  in  three  separate  prisons,  where 
they  remained  until  the  next  day.  Colonel  Fisher, 
myself,  Adjutant  Murry,  and  the  small  boys  were 
quartered  at  the  house  of  Don  Trinedad,  a  kind 
and  hospitable  man,  who  showed  us  every  attention 
in  his  power. 

January  2d.  Marched  ten  miles  to  a  rancho, 
where  our  men  were  herded  in  a  cow-pen  for  the 
night ;  and  though  they  were  suffering  from  sore 
feet,  occasioned  by  the  first  day's  march,  yet  there 
were  some  among  them  who  would  have  their  fun. 
Being  herded  in  a  cow-pen  like  so  many  cattle,  the 
fun-makers  were  determined  to  complete  the  char- 
acter. They  would  get  down  upon  their  all-fours, 
bow  their  necks,  paw  up  the  dirt,  and  low  like  bulls, 
to  the  no  small  astonishment  of  their  captors. 

January  3d.  Our  men  were  marched  twenty-one 
miles  to  old  Rhinosa,  over  a  fine  tract  of  country, 
and  here  herded  in  a  sheep-pen.  Here,  too,  the 
comedians  had  a  new  character  to  play,  and  it  is 
certain  they  bleated  more  like  sheep  than  any  sheep 
in  Mexico. 

January  4th.  Our  men  were  marched  eighteen 
miles  to  New  Rhinosa,  situated  upon  a  high  hill, 
about  one  mile  from  the  Rio  Grande,  and  contain- 
ing 2000  inhabitants.  Here  great  preparation  had 
been  made  for  the  victor's  triumphal  entry.     Tri- 


120  TRIUMPHAL    ENTRY. 

umphal  arches,  made  of  reeds  bound  together,  and 
decorated  with  parti-coloured  handkerchiefs,  calico, 
and  ladies'  shawls  and  petticoats,  were  thrown 
across  the  principal  streets  through  which  we  pass- 
ed, and  from  which  appropriate  mottoes  of  glory 
and  honour  were  suspended.  To  make  our  sur- 
prise the  greater,  and  impress  us  the  more  with  the 
wonderful  resources  of  the  great  nation,  just  as  we 
entered  the  town,  riding  in  company  with  the  gen- 
eral and  staff,  the  warriors  of  the  Careese  tribe  of 
Indians,  naked,  with  the  exception  of  the  breech- 
clout,  and  painted  after  their  war  fashion,  suddenly 
popped  into  our  path,  at  the  same  time  giving  the 
war-whoop  and  firing  their  guns  in  our  faces.  Then 
suddenly  wheeling  off  to  reload,  the  same  manoeu- 
vres were  repeated  several  times.  This  excited 
mirth  rather  than  surprise,  and  was  followed  by 
something  more  ridiculous  still :  about  twenty  little 
boys,  between  the  ages  of  ten  and  fourteen,  led  by 
a  little  old  man  of  sixty,  who  was  not  larger  than  a 
boy  of  twelve  years  old,  all  most  fantastically  dress- 
ed with  different  coloured  handkerchiefs,  and  rib- 
ands fixed  about  them,  with  small  mirrors  fastened 
upon  their  heads  so  as  to  form  an  obelisk  of  four 
sides.  Each  held  in  his  hand  a  long-handled  gourd, 
decorated  with  blue  and  yellow  paper,  with  small 
gravel  inside.  They  were  attended  by  several  fid- 
dlers, and  suddenly  appeared  before  us,  led  by  their 
old  leader,  dancing  in  regular  time  to  the  music,  first 
upon  one  foot  and  then  upon  the  other.     They  so 


A    GRATEFUL    PADRE.  121 

contrived,  that  while  one  foot  was  hopping  to  the 
music,  the  other  was  shaking  to  it,  and  the  long- 
handled  gourd  and  pebbles  of  each  kept  good  time 
with  the  fiddles  and  the  motions  of  the  little  old 
man.  He  would  lead  his  little  band  close  to  our 
horses'  heads,  and  as  we  advanced,  by  motion  of 
his  arms,  his  double  file  of  juveniles  would  wheel  off 
right  and  left,  precede  us  thirty  or  forty  yards,  and 
perform  the  same  manoeuvres  over,  always  keeping 
good  time  in  step  and  motion.  Thus  were  we 
danced  to  our  quarters  about  half  a  mile. 

We  remained  here  the  5th.  Through  the  inter- 
cession of  Padre  De  Lire,  the  priest  of  Comargo,  Dr. 
Wm.  M.  Shepherd  was  taken  out  of  the  prison  and 
permitted  to  accompany  our  party,  which  was  kept 
with  the  general.  The  padre  was  informed  that 
Dr.  S.  prevented  his  being  fired  upon  as  he  was 
coming  into  our  ranks  previous  to  the  surrender  at 
Mier,  for  which  he  felt  grateful ;  and  he  often  evin- 
ced his  gratitude  by  taking  from  his  pocket  a  flask 
of  brandy,  vino  mascal,  and  taking  a  drink  with  us. 
Here  we  left  one  of  our  men,  by  the  name  of 
M'Dade,  who  shortly  after  died. 

January  6th.  Marched  to  church  to  witness  the 
ceremony  of  mass,  accompanied  by  the  firing  of 
cannon  and  crackers,  &c. ;  then  marched  twen- 
ty-five miles,  and  again  lodged  in  a  cowpen.  In 
passing  a  cornfield,  a  negro  fellow,  who  had  run  off 
from  Texas,  looked  over  the  fence,  and,  after  giving 
his  head  a  mournful  shake,  he  said,  in  a  still  more 

a 


122  TOM   AND    ESAU. 

melancholy  voice,  "  Aha  !  white  man,  dey  cotch  you 
now  ;  dey  gib  you  hell !"  This  comfort  was  quite 
as  good  as  their  cowpen  lodgings,  up  to  their  ankles 
in  wet  manure. 

January  7th.  Marched  eighteen  miles,  and  quar- 
tered in  a  cowpen.  It  was  of  much  importance  to 
get  a  cowpen  to  put  our  men  in,  as  they  were  more 
easily  guarded ;  hence  the  difference  in  the  march- 
es, which  were  suited  to  the  locality  of  said  pens. 
These  pens  were  built  by  placing  pickets  close  to- 
gether in  the  ground,  in  an  upright  position,  and 
fastening  their  tops  with  rawhide  to  a  horizontal 
timber.  Around  these  pens  their  guards  would  be 
placed. 

January  8th.  Marched  fifteen  miles  over  a  rich, 
flat  country,  well  adapted  to  the  cultivation  of  sugar, 
and  camped  again  in  a  cowpen  at  the  village  of 
Warloupe.  While  at  this  place,  many  citizens  of 
consequence  came  out  from  Matamoras  to  congrat- 
ulate General  Ampudia  upon  his  victory.  Among 
these  were  two  of  our  acquaintances,  Tom  and  Esau. 
These  gentlemen,  now  of  so  much  consequence  as 
to  ride  three  leagues  in  a  coach  to  congratulate 
General  Ampudia  upon  his  splendid  victory,  were 
General  Sam  Houston's  two  barbers,  so  well  known 
to  the  public  of  Texas.  Tom  treated  us  with  mark- 
ed respect  and  attention,  spoke  of  his  prospects  in 
that  country,  his  intended  nuptials,  invited  us  to  the 
wedding,  and  said  that  General  Ampudia  was  to 
stand  godfather  on  the  occasion.     He  remarked  to 


ENTRY    INTO    MATAMORAS.  123 

General  Ampudia,  upon  meeting  him,  in  our  pres- 
ence, "  Well,  general,  I  told  you,  before  leaving 
Matamoras,  that  when  you  met  these  gentlemen 
you  would  catch  it."  He  spoke  much  of  Texas, 
said  that  he  appreciated  many  gentlemen  there 
highly,  but  that  he  could  not  consent  longer  to  be 
the  slave  of  such  an  unprincipled  monster  as  Sam 
Houston,  and  regretted  the  necessity  of  leaving  the 
country.  Esau  was  more  sulky,  spoke  in  disreputa- 
ble terms  of  his  old  master,  and  insultingly  to  some 
of  our  men. 

January  9th.  Marched  nine  miles  to  Matamoras; 
but,  before  entering  the  city,  we  were  halted  for  the 
general  to  receive  the  congratulations  of  a  large 
number  of  friends  who  came  out  in  coaches  to  meet 
him.  Many  women  and  girls  came  out  with  joyous 
countenances  to  meet  their  husbands  and  sweet- 
hearts, but,  alas  for  them,  they  had  experienced  the 
effect  of  the  Texian  rifle  at  Mier,  and  they  returned 
with  heavy  hearts  and  bitter  lamentations.  A  tri- 
umphal arch  was  thrown  across  the  principal  street 
through  which  we  passed  at  every  hundred  yards ; 
and,  to  make  the  grand  pageant  as  imposing  as  pos- 
sible, soldiers  were  stationed  upon  each  side  of  the 
street  about  thirty  feet  apart,  and  what  they  lacked 
in  soldiers  they  made  up  for  the  occasion  by  placing 
soldier-clothes  upon  citizens.  We  first  accompanied 
the  general  to  the  church,  which  he  entered  to  re- 
ceive the  blessings  of  the  fathers ;  at  the  same  time 
we  were  placed  under  the  charge  of  Captain  Castro, 


124    GRAND  BALL  IN  HONOUR  OF  AMPUDIA. 

who  hurried  us  along  at  full  gallop  to  the  general's 
quarters,  to  prevent  the  populace  from  offering  in- 
sults. Thence  followed  our  men  slowly  and  sol- 
emnly up  one  street  and  down  another,  to  give  the 
brutal  populace  full  opportunity  to  gaze  at,  and  heap 
upon  them  dirty  epithets,  in  which  their  language  is 
so  copious.  Among  the  populace  were  a  large  num- 
ber of  negroes  who  absconded  from  Texas:  these 
were  among  the  foremost  in  their  abusive  epithets, 
and  our  men,  without  the  power  of  punishing  such 
insolence,  would  gnash  their  teeth  in  rage.  At  night 
a  grand  ball  was  given  in  honour  of  General  Am- 
pudia  and  officers,  and  we  were  turned  over  in 
charge  of  a  new  officer,  who,  to  secure  us  the  better 
for  the  night,  conducted  us  to  a  lodging  in  an  unfur- 
nished room  in  the  common  prison.  Here  we  were 
locked  up  without  fire,  bedding,  or  any  article  of  fur- 
niture. This  we  presumed  was  done  by  order  of 
the  general;  and  it  was  so  much  at  variance  both 
with  our  former  treatment  and  his  gratuitous  prom- 
ises to  us,  that,  after  much  persuasion,  I  obtained 
from  the  officer  of  the  guard  pen,  ink,  and  paper, 
and  addressed  him  a  note,  which  was  forthwith  de- 
livered, in  which  note  we  abused  his  Mexican  per- 
fidy and  falsehood  in  the  broadest  terms.  To  our 
astonishment,  in  about  one  hour  the  doors  of  our 
prison  were  thrown  open,  and  we  reconducted  to 
our  former  quarters  by  the  general's  aid-de-camp. 
We  have  reason  to  believe  this  was  the  more  prompt- 
ly done  through  the  intercession  of  General  Romola 


KINDNESS    OF    AMPUDIA.  125 

de  la  Vega  and  Captain  Castro.  Next  morning 
General  Ampudia,  after  apologizing  for  our  treat- 
ment the  night  before,  informed  us  that  we  must 
prepare  for  immediate  march  to  the  city  of  Mexico. 
He  also  informed  us  that  Colonel  Fisher  and  myself 
should  be  sent  on  in  advance  of  our  men,  as  hosta- 
ges for  their  good  conduct.  We  replied,  that  if  we 
were  denied  the  privilege  of  accompanying  our 
men,  which  we  most  preferred,  we  would  cheerfully 
go  in  their  advance  to  Mexico,  to  endeavour  to  do 
them  all  possible  service.  We  also  desired  a  day 
to  make  preparations  and  write  letters  to  the  United 
States  and  Texas,  which  was  granted.  After  our 
letters  were  written,  they  were  submitted  to  his  in- 
spection, which  he  in  the  most  gentlemanly  manner 
declined,  and  endorsed  a  free  passport  upon  them. 

Matamoras  is  the  only  American-built  town  we 
saw  in  Mexico.  It  has  many  frame  houses  with 
shingled  roofs,  and  is  built  of  as  combustible  mate- 
rials as  most  Southern  towns  in  the  United  States. 
It  is  situated  about  half  a  mile  from  the  Rio  Grande, 
and  thirty  from  its  mouth,  contains  a  population  of 
about  ten  thousand,  and  is  the  most  defenceless  city 
in  Mexico, 


126   PREPARATIONS  FOR  MARCH  TO  MEXICO. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Preparations  for  March  to  Mexico. — Our  Friends  J.  P.  Schatzell,  Marks, 
and  Strother. — Protest  against  ironing  our  Men. — March  for  Monterey 
under  charge  of  Colonel  Savriego. — Held  as  Hostages  for  the  good 
Conduct  of  our  Men. — Interview  with  them  in  Prison. — Arrival  at  Cai- 
dereta. — Bad  Treatment. — Letter  to  Ampudia.— Arrival  at  Monterey. 
— Character  of  Colonel  Savriego. — Quartered  at  Colonel  Bermudez's. 
— His  Character  and  Family. — Interview  with  Governor  Ortega. 

January  10th  and  11th  were  employed  in  wri- 
ting and  preparing  for  our  march.  Several  Amer- 
ican gentlemen  called  upon  us  and  offered  their  ser- 
vices, among  whom  we  recollect  with  gratitude  Mr. 
J.  P.  Schatzell,  Mr.  Marks,  United  States  vice-con- 
sul, and  Mr.  Strother.  These  gentlemen  were  of 
infinite  service  to  our  men  in  furnishing  money, 
blankets,  and  other  absolute  necessaries,  without 
which  they  must  have  suffered  much  more  than 
they  did.  While  they  have  laid  us  under  lasting 
obligations  for  such  kindness,  our  country  should 
not  feel  less  proud  of  such  friends,  nor  be  slow  to 
requite  such  services. 

Having  learned  that  it  was  in  contemplation  to 
march  our  men  in  irons  to  Mexico,  and  that  they 
were  in  preparation  to  be  placed  upon  them,  Colo- 
nel Fisher  and  myself  remonstrated  against  it  in 
the  strongest  terms.  General  Ampudia,  in  answer, 
said  that  Colonel  Canales,  the  officer  who  was  to 
take  charge  of  them  to  Monterey,  insisted  upon  hav- 


COURTESIES.  127 

ing  them  ironed,  and  that  he  would  not  undertake 
to  guard  two  hundred  and  twenty  Texians  with  less 
than  one  thousand  Mexicans  ;  but  that  he  had  over- 
ruled the  order  for  ironing  them  as  violative  of  his 
articles  of  capitulation. 

January  12th.  Early  in  the  morning  preparations 
were  made  for  starting,  and  I  applied  to  General 
Ampudia  for  permission  to  take  with  us  our  inter- 
preter, Daniel  D.  Henrie,  and  my  servant,  Samuel 
C.  Lyon.  I  will  here  remark  that  Lyon  was  not 
my  servant  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word, 
but  that  we  had  lived  next-door  neighbours  for  six 
years,  and  I  knew  I  could  greatly  serve  him  by 
having  him  with  me.  I  informed  the  general  that 
such  courtesies  were  common  for  us  to  extend  to 
Mexican  officers  when  our  prisoners,  and  he  gave 
the  order  for  them  to  accompany  us.  Colonel 
Fisher,  myself,  Dr.  Shepherd,  Adjutant  Murry,  In- 
terpreter Henrie,  and  S.  C.  Lyon,  were  each  fur- 
nished a  horse,  and  placed  under  charge  of  Lieu- 
tenant-colonel Savriego,  who  had  under  his  com- 
mand about  forty  cavalry.  In  the  morning  previ- 
ous, not  expecting  the  privilege  of  seeing  our  men, 
I  addressed  them  the  following  note,  in  which  Col- 
onel Fisher  joined  me : 

"  Fellow  Prisoners, 
"  It  has  fallen  to  our  lot  to  become  the  captives 
of  the  nation  with  which  we  are  at  war.     This  is 
the  fortune  of  that  policy ;  and  though  our  condition 


128  NOTE    TO    THE    PRISONERS. 

is  incident  to  these  privations,  let  us  bear  up  under 
them  with  the  fortitude  of  men.  Let  us  nerve  our 
souls  in  that  impregnable  armour  which  lightens  the 
weary  limb,  and  which  the  steel  of  our  enemy  can- 
not penetrate.  That  immortal  spirit  will  make  us 
superior  to  our  condition,  and  triumph  over  our  mis- 
fortunes. Recollect  that  the  best  nations  of  the 
world  have  battled  with  each  other,  and  the  best 
men  have  been  in  like  condition  with  ourselves. 
Indulge,  therefore,  all  reasonable  hope  in  the  mag- 
nanimity of  our  enemy,  and  in  that  justice  which  is 
the  all-pervading  providence  of  God. 

"  To-day,  countrymen,  it  is  the  pleasure  of  our 
captors  that  we  should  be  parted,  and  sent  on  in  ad- 
vance to  the  capital.  A  long  and  weary  journey 
lies  before  us.  The  gloom  of  the  prison  and  the 
fatigues  of  this  thousand  miles  of  space  we  embrace 
as  pleasures  in  comparison  to  this  cruel  separation 
with  you,  who  have  so  nobly  battled  for  your  coun- 
try and  shared  every  danger. 

"  The  short  time  we  have  been  permitted  to  re- 
main at  this  place  precludes  the  possibility  of  get- 
ting any  assistance  from  our  countrymen  at  home, 
therefore  our  means  of  pecuniary  benefit  to  you  are 
small  indeed;  but  please  accept  with  the  warmest 
feelings  of  our  hearts  the  small  amount  sent  by  Ad- 
jutant Murry  for  the  assistance  of  the  more  unfor- 
tunate who  may  be  sick  on  the  road. 

"Now,  dear  friends  and  neighbours,  let  us  part, 
but  with  that  hope  which  stimulates  man  to  look 


COLONEL  FISHER  AND  THE  AUTHOR  HOSTAGES.  129 

beyond  the  present,  and  which,  with  God's  pleas- 
use,  will  one  day  unite  us  again  at  our  homes." 

Just  before  starting,  General  Ampudia  intimated 
to  Colonel  Fisher  and  myself  that  he  was  informed 
some  of  our  men  contemplated  a  charge  upon  their 
guards,  and  that  we  must  go  by  the  prison  and  in- 
form them  of  the  consequences  to  ourselves,  should 
such  be  the  case ;  that  we  would  be  held  as  host- 
ages for  their  good  conduct,  and  treated  according- 
ly. Colonel  Fisher  desired  Captain  Cameron  "  to 
use  his  own  judgment  in  the  matter,"  if  such  was 
in  contemplation.  I  implored  the  men,  "  as  they 
regarded  my  friendship,  their  own  condition,  and 
the  honour  of  the  country,  to  let  no  opportunity 
slip  in  overpowering  their  guards  and  getting  home, 
and  to  do  so  regardless  of  any  consequences  to  my- 
self." The  men  all  testified  by  their  burning  tears 
that  my  advice  should  not  be  lost  upon  them. 

We  were  escorted,  rather  than  guarded,  by  Col- 
onel Savriego  and  his  troop  to  Monterey,  a  distance 
of  two  hundred  and  seventy-five  English  miles.  We 
reached  Monterey  on  the  22d  of  January,  and  were 
furnished  quarters  at  the  hospitable  mansion  of  old 
Colonel  Bermudez,  the  mayor  de  la  plaza.  The 
day  before  reaching  Monterey  we  arrived  at  the 
beautiful  town  of  Caidereta,  containing  a  popula- 
tion of  about  ten  thousand  souls.  Here,  for  the 
first  time  since  we  were  under  the  charge  of  Colo- 
nel Savriego,  we  were  treated  badly.     Great  prep- 

R 


130  LETTER    TO    AMPUDIA. 

aration  had  been  made  to  exhibit  us,  which  Colo- 
nel S.  refused  to  permit,  and  at  night  we  were  nei- 
ther furnished  bedding  by  the  alcalde,  nor  permitted 
to  hire  the  use  of  any  with  our  own  money.  We 
understood  this  treatment  was  induced  by  Colonel 
Can  ales,  who  had  written  on  to  this  place  much  to 
our  disparagement.  The  following  letter,  which  I 
wrote  to  General  Ampudia,  will  fully  explain  not 
only  his  treacherous  character,  but  the  small  cun- 
ning of  one  who  has  generally  profited  by  such 
treachery. 

"  Monterey,  January  23d,  1843. 
"  To  General  Pedro  D' Ampudia,  ) 
of  the  Mexican  Army  :         ) 

"  Sir, — Having  safely  arrived  thus  far  on  our  way 
to  the  capital,  we  desire  to  express  to  you  our  sin- 
cere thanks  for  the  generous  courtesies  which,  main- 
ly through  your  kindness,  we  have  met  upon  the 
road.*  At  Caidereta  only  have  we  been  treated  in 
a  different  manner,  and  this,  we  understand,  has  been 
induced  by  Colonel  Canales.  Of  that  treatment  we 
do  not  complain  ;  but  when  the  colonel  makes  him- 
self the  hero  of  mier,  we  feel  much  humiliation  in 

*  What  the  writer  has  said  of  General  Ampudia  in  his  Journal,  both 
candour  and  justice  required ;  and  while  it  gave  him  pleasure  to  speak 
that  in  his  praise  which  he,  in  truth,  could  say  of  few  other  officers  in 
Mexico,  it  has  since  been  a  matter  of  regret  that  General  A.'s  conduct 
towards  the  ill-starred  General  Sentmanat  is  infamous  in  the  extreme. 
The  capture  and  murder  of  that  unfortunate  "  Federalist"  should  have 
satiated  the  vengeance  of  a  despot,  but  the  subsequent  boiling  of  his 
head  in  oil  was  a  vindictive  refinement  in  cannibalism  disgraceful  in  the 
vilest  savage. 


CHARACTER    OF    SAVRIEGO.  131 

the  imputation  that  we  surrendered  to  him.  We 
scorn  such  a  reflection,  for  that  gentleman  had  an 
opportunity  at  Guerrero,  with  three  hundred  troops, 
to  meet  fifty  of  us,  and  declined  it.  Colonel  Fisher 
and  officers  join  me  in  the  hope  that  General  Am- 
pudia  entertains  a  better  opinion  of  their  gallantry 
than  to  believe  that  such  a  thing  could  be  possible 
to  surrender  to  him  who  once  deceived  Texians. 

"  We  farther  desire  to  tender,  through  you,  to  Col- 
onel Savriego,  officers,  and  troop,  who  have  thus  far 
accompanied  us,  our  heartfelt  thanks  for  their  sol- 
dier-like conduct  and  many  kindnesses. 

"  With  sentiments  of  the  highest  consideration 
and  esteem,  I  am  your  obedient  servant, 

"  Thomas  J.  Green." 

From  having  heard  Colonel  Savriego's  name  as- 
sociated with  some  marauding  expedition  upon  our 
frontier  some  years  back,  we  had  wholly  miscon- 
ceived his  character.  We  had  supposed  him  to  be 
some  rough  bandit,  who  dealt  in  robbery  and  mur- 
der from  habit  or  choice.  Justice  both  to  him  and 
ourselves  requires  us  to  say  that  we  have  not  met 
in  Mexico  a  more  intelligent,  humane,  and  accom- 
plished officer.  The  following  note  to  him  will 
give  the  reader  a  more  correct  knowledge  of  our 
estimation  of  his  worth  : 

';  Monterey,  January  23d,  1843. 
"  To  Colonel  Savriego,  Mexican  Army. 

"  Sir, — Being  about  to  separate  from  you  on  our 
progress  to  the  capital,  injustice  both  to  yourself  and 


132  STAY   AT    MONTEREY. 

our  own  feelings,  we  cannot  do  so  without  express- 
ing our  warmest  gratitude  for  your  kindness  to  us  as 
prisoners  of  war,  while  under  your  charge  from 
Matamoras. 

;i  Your  lofty  and  gallant  bearing  in  the  battle-field 
was  a  sure  guarantee  of  what  we  have  since  real- 
ized in  your  magnanimous  generosity,  for  such  is 
the  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  truly  brave. 

"  When,  sir,  we  met  in  the  strife  of  battle,  we 
did  so  as  political  enemies,  each  doing  his  duty  for 
his  country,  since  which,  though  it  has  been  the  for- 
tune of  war  for  us  to  be  prisoners,  it  has  been  your 
better  fortune  to  lighten  our  situation  by  the  kindest 
personal  considerations.  We  hope,  therefore,  that 
many  years  of  happiness  may  be  yours,  and  that 
good  fortune  may  again  unite  us  where  our  friend- 
ship may  be  reciprocated." 

We  remained  six  days  at  Monterey,  which  is  a 
beautiful  city,  containing  a  population  of  about  twen- 
ty thousand,  situated  high  up  on  the  Rio  San  Fer- 
nando, and  between  two  elevated  mountains.  It  is 
the  capital  of  New  Leon,  over  which  Governor- 
general  Ortega  presided.  At  this  city  we  were 
treated  wTith  every  kindness  which  our  situation 
would  allow.  Our  table  was  supplied  from  the  best 
French  restaurant  in  the  city ;  and  our  kind  host,  old 
Colonel  Bermudez,  was  all  the  time  apologizing  for 
not  having  things  good  enough  for  us. 

We  call  Colonel  B.  old,  as  the  highest  encomium 


COLONEL    BERMUDEZ    AND    FAMILY.  133 

we  can  bestow  upon  him  ;  for,  with  one  exception, 
and  that  one  Colonel  Terns,  of  the  4th  regiment 
of  infantry,  we  never  met  an  old  officer  in  Mexico 
who  did  not  possess  the  highest  sense  of  magnanim- 
ity and  humanity.  Colonel  Bermudez  is  about  six- 
ty-five years  of  age,  has  seen  much  service,  and  is  a 
gentleman  of  the  old  school  model,  of  which  I  have 
a  far  better  opinion  than  of  the  new.  He  has  an 
interesting  family,  and  several  beautiful  daughters. 
These  amiable  ladies,  to  beguile  our  heavy  hours, 
would  sing,  and  play  upon  the  guitar  and  piano  for 
us,  and  at  evenings  would  invite  the  elite  of  the 
city,  some  of  whom  doubtless  came  to  see  us  Tex- 
ians,  whom  they  would  introduce  as  " inuy  valiente" 
very  brave.  At  these  evening  coteries  we  would 
endeavour  to  appear  as  if  nothing  had  happened  to 
us,  and  join  in  the  dance  as  lightsome  as  any.  The 
ladies  would  say,  "  What  wonderful  people  you 
must  be  !  Here  you  are,  prisoners  in  a  foreign  land, 
having  already  passed  many  dangers,  and  you  must 
expect  to  fall  into  hands  who  will  treat  you  unkind- 
ly— for  all  Mexicans  are  not  what  they  should  be — 
and  still  you  appear  as  if  nothing  had  befallen  you/' 
How  delightful  it  is  to  witness  the  salutations  of 
Mexican  female  friends  !  they  trip  across  the  room 
to  meet  each  other  with  a  gait  superior  to  our  wom- 
en, and  instead  of  grasping  the  hand,  they  embrace 
with  a  bewitching,  gossamer,  ethereal  touch,  which 
cannot  properly  be  described.  In  their  balldress 
they  look  like  winged  creatures,  and  the  moscheto 


134  MEXICAN    DANCES. 

hawk,  in  stooping  after  its  tiny  prey,  does  not  ap- 
pear more  lightsome  than  they  when  swinging 
through  their  delightful  dances. 

Most  of  the  Mexican  dances  are  exceedingly 
beautiful ;  there  is  a  luxury  in  the  music,  and  a 
fascinating  swing  in  their  women  peculiarly  winning. 
Nothing  can  exceed  the  grace  of  their  quadrilles  and 
contra-dances.  Their  waltzes  and  gallopades  are 
too  much  of  a  good  thing  for  my  unsophisticated 
taste.  Among  their  other  dances,  they  have  one 
called  the  zopilote,  or  turkey-buzzard  dance.  This 
is  performed  somewhat  after  the  manner  of  the  bull- 
dance  in  old  Virginia,  a  dance  well  known  to  the 
young  men  of  that  good  old  state  at  the  conclu- 
sion of  their  balls,  after  the  retirement  of  the  ladies. 
Their  fandango  is  a  lively  operation,  mostly  danced 
by  the  more  common  people,  in  which  the  gentle- 
man leads  his  partner  to  the  centre  of  the  room ; 
here  they  move  face  to  face,  the  gentleman  beating 
his  feet  against  the  floor  in  admirable  time  to  the  mu- 
sic, while  the  lady  faces  him  in  a  regular  monotonous 
hitch-up  and  back-down  step,  as  uniform  as  the  os- 
cillation of  a  pendulum.  Thus  it  is  kept  up  until 
each  party  is  relieved  by  some  other  groups. 

As  the  lady  is  thus  relieved,  her  caballero,  in  com- 
pliment to  her  performance,  serves  her  with  either 
coffee,  chocolate,  or  aquardiente  and  a  cigarrito ; 
the  latter  she  invariably  takes  between  the  middle 
and  forefinger,  and  occasionally  indulges  with  infi- 
nite grace  the  luxury  of  inhaling  its  delicious  aroma. 


MADE    A    MARTYR    OF.  135 

Unlike  the  prodigal  Virginian,  who  puffs  it  out  upon 
the  high  pressure  principle,  after  keeping  the  smoke 
some  time  in  her  mouth,  she  suffers  it  to  escape 
from  her  nasal  organ  with  such  quiet  gentleness  as 
to  allow  of  the  full  enjoyment  of  its  odour,  while  its 
fumes  settle  under  the  olfactories  of  her  beau,  giving 
him  a  second  benefit  of  the  well-nursed  incense. 

To  one  like  myself,  who  had  never  smoked  a 
cigar,  this  fumigation  was  made  sufferable  through 
the  channel  whence  it  came ;  but  my  politeness  had 
been  put  to  a  severer  test. 

On  one  occasion,  the  fair  senorita  with  whom  I 
danced,  seeing  that  I  did  not  smoke,  took  from  her 
reticule  a  cigarrito,  lighted  it  with  the  one  she  was 
smoking  by  first  placing  the  new  one  in  her  own 
rosy  lips,  and  then  offered  it  to  me.  Dreading  the 
consequences,  I  commenced  an  apology,  when  my 
interpreter  suddenly  checked  me  by  saying  that  it 
would  be  an  insult  to  the  lady  not  to  smoke  it.  I 
received  it  with  what  good  grace  I  could,  although 
with  something  of  a  martyr  spirit,  wTell  knowing  the 
inevitable  result.  I  resolved,  however,  to  assume 
the  best  disguise  I  might ;  so  I  crossed  my  legs,  and 
gently  half  closing  my  left  eye,  looked  up  to  the 
ceiling  with  the  little  burning  abhorrence  sticking  in 
my  lips  as  if  I  was  an  old  hand  at  the  business.  1 
was  getting  on  with  great  proficiency,  and  had  let 
off  some  half  dozen  tremendous  puffs,  when,  reflect- 
ing upon  the  vulgarity  of  this  tar-kiln  operation,  I 
attempted  to  squeeze  it  out  through  my  nose.     This 


136        DIFFERENT  NATIONAL  CUSTOMS. 

required  experience ;  for,  instead  of  giving  it  vent 
through  that  channel,  I  forced  it  down  both  into  my 
lungs  and  stomach,  thus  creating  deadly  nausea, 
which  caused  me  to  break  for  the  door  like  a  quar- 
ter-horse to  relieve  my  distress.  The  ready  wit  of 
my  interpreter  rendered  my  desponding  speech  into 
a  compliment ;  but  when  I  suddenly  left  my  seat  for 
the  door  to  relieve  my  sickness,  and  he  explained 
that,  in  compliment  to  her  beauty,  it  was  the  first  I 
had  ever  smoked,  she  was  greatly  flattered,  at  what 
made  me  the  more  inveterate  against  a  nationality 
so  disagreeable. 

In  objecting  to  this  national  custom  among  the 
ladies,  a  very  intelligent  Mexican  gentleman  said, 
"  It  may,  senor,  appear  very  obnoxious  to  your  na- 
tion, but  the  force  of  habit  makes  it  look  well  to  us. 
The  men  of  your  nation  masticate  tobacco ;  the 
Turks  and  Chinese  chew  opium ;  and  these,  to  us, 
appear  to  be  a  very  filthy  practice ;  and  in  the  court 
circles  of  England  and  France,  the  most  refined  na- 
tions upon  the  earth,  the  ladies  use  morphine  for  the 
same  purpose,  while  in  a  portion  of  your  happy  coun- 
try your  own  women  mop  with  snufT.  Thus,  what 
the  English  and  French  ladies  abuse  in  the  Turks 
and  Chinese,  the  refinements  of  fashion  and  taste 
furnish  them  in  a  different  shape  ;  and  what  your 
women  abuse  in  ours  for  its  public  use,  they  take 
by  stealth,  and  in  a  still  more  displeasing  manner. 
It  is  all,  senor,  for  the  purpose  of  creating  artificial 
excitement :  and  while  I  say  that  you  object  to  our 


SNUFF-DIPPERS   AND    SNUFF-MOPPERS.  137 

ladies  smoking,  we  believe  the  most  filthy  of  all 
practices  is  that  of  your  '  snuff-dippers!  '  He  con- 
tinued :  "  On  one  occasion,  senor,  I  was  in  the  habit 
of  visiting  a  lady  in  your  country,  whose  time  of  life 
was  verging  upon  the  '  sear  and  yellow  leaf.'  She 
was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  unwelcome  thirty- 
three,  which  concentrates  to  the  eye-corners  those 
hateful  crow-feet,  which  from  that  time  is  so  sure  to 
ride  the  countenance  to  the  grave.  In  the  morning 
this  lady  showed  all  the  languor  of  previous  excess, 
and  she  was  as  uninteresting  until  she  spent  an  hour 
with  her  snuff-mop  as  if  she  had  just  awaked  from 
the  excessive  use  of  ardent  spirits.  I  once,  by  acci- 
dent, saw  her  mopping — and  such  a  mouth !  I  never 
after  that  time  thought  of  her,  but  what  I  saw.  Oh  ! 
that  horrid  mouth,  in  all  its  licentious  indulgence ; 
teeth,  tongue,  and  gums  were  filled  with  this  cruel- 
looking  lava,  which  had  overrun  the  crater,  and 
formed  a  sable  periphery  of  most  frightful  extent. 
Ah  me,  I  thought,  how  happy  are  our  men,  that  we 
are  not  compelled  to  kiss  such  mouths  !  Do  tell  me, 
is  it  the  mop  which  makes  all  your  young  ladies  so 
entertaining?  and  believe  me,  senor,  I  love  one  of 
your  pretty  girls,  but  at  every  thought  of  the  mop 
and  her  horrid  dirty  mouth  I  am  taken  aback."  I 
assured  the  gentleman  that  this  practice  was  con- 
fined to  but  few  in  our  country,  and  I  believed  that 
every  decent  gentleman,  both  in  Texas  and  the 
United  States,  looked  upon  it  as  far  more  odious 
than  smoking.     "  I  thank  you,  senor,  for  that  fact," 

S 


138  INTERVIEW  WITH  ORTEGA. 

says  he,  "  for  my  sweetheart  is  in  Philadelphia ;  I 
hope  soon  to  visit  her,  and  you  now  make  me  the 
more  anxious  to  do  so." 

I  confess  I  was  fairly  beaten  by  this  intelligent 
gentleman  ;  but  while  he  found  in  me  no  apologist 
for  the  "  snuff-dippers"  and  snuff-eaters  of  my  own 
country,  he  failed  to  convince  me  that  it  was  right 
for  a  pretty  girl  to  smoke.  Though  I  have  ever 
been  opposed  to  matrimonial  divorces  as  most  de- 
structive to  the  happiest  state  of  society,  yet,  if  I 
were  a  judge  or  legislator,  and  the  abused  hus- 
band was  to  set  forth  in  his  petition  that  his  better 
half  smoked  and  mopped,  if  I  could  not  upon  prin- 
ciples of  law  entertain  his  application,  I  would  sym- 
pathize in  his  wrongs. 

The  third  day  after  our  arrival  in  the  city  of  Mon- 
terey, Governor  Ortega  desired  to  see  Colonel  Fish- 
er and  myself  at  his  quarters,  he  having  been  sick 
and  confined  to  his  house.  He  received  us  very 
courteously,  and  expressed  his  desire  that  we  should 
be  supplied  with  every  comfort.  Before  leaving 
Monterey,  we  addressed  the  following  notes  to  the 
governor  and  our  good  host  Colonel  Bermudez : 

"  Monterey,  January  27th,  1843. 
"  To  his  Excellency  General  Ortega. 

Sir, — Before  leaving  New  Leon,  over  which  your 
excellency  presides  with  honour  to  the  state  and 
such  happy  benefits  to  the  people,  permit  us  to  ex- 
press our  warmest  gratitude  for  the  kind  reception 
and  friendly  entertainment  you  have  extended  to  us. 


LETTER  TO   COLONEL  BERMUDEZ.  139 

"  To  be  prisoners  of  war  in  a  foreign  land,  far  from 
our  country,  our  homes,  and  our  families,  is  melan- 
choly enough  ;  but  that  we  have  become  so  in  doing 
the  bidding  of  our  own  country  is  a  consolation  be- 
yond all  price.  That  you  have  lightened  these  mel- 
ancholy reflections  by  the  kindest  considerations  is 
still  more  honourable  both  to  your  heart  and  head; 
and  rest  assured,  sir,  that  that  great  moral  principle 
which  now  governs  the  civilized  world  is  more  om- 
nipotent in  its  happy  influence  upon  mankind  than 
the  most  destructive  engines  of  war. 

"  Allow  us  to  hope  that  many  years  of  happiness 
may  be  yours,  and  that  you  may  long  continue  in 
the  full  enjoyment  of  deserved  political  and  indi- 
vidual prosperity." 

"Monterey,  January  27th,  1843. 
"  To  Colonel  Bermudez,  Mexican  Army. 

"  Sir, — Since  it  has  been  our  good  fortune  to  be 
placed  under  your  charge,  such  has  been  the  kind- 
ness of  your  treatment,  we  beg  you  to  allow  us  the 
present  privilege  of  reciprocating  that  kindness  so 
far  as  this  humble  testimonial  of  our  hearts'  offering 
can  do. 

"  Your  magnanimity  of  heart,  as  well  as  experi- 
ence in  the  world,  rightly  estimates  the  situation 
and  feelings  of  the  brave,  who,  through  the  fortune 
of  war,  become  prisoners  in  a  foreign  land.  Such 
has  been  our  fortune.  In  duty  to  our  own,  we  en- 
tered your  country  as  political  enemies,  and  manfully 
performed  that  duty.     Your  conduct,  and  that  of 


140  MARCH   FOR   SALTILLO. 

other  Mexican  officers,  governed  by  the  highest 
principles  of  moral  bravery,  does  more  in  winning 
our  admiration  and  affections,  and  in  bringing  about 
a  right  understanding  between  our  respective  na- 
tions, than  the  carnage  of  a  thousand  battles. 

"  In  leaving  your  hospitable  roof  on  our  progress 
to  the  capital,  we  beg  to  tender  you  and  your  ami- 
able family  our  warmest  gratitude,  with  our  hearts' 
best  wishes  that  you  may  continue  to  enjoy  many 
years  of  felicity  in  the  exercise  of  that  domestic 
happiness,  of  which,  dear  sir,  you  are  so  pre-eminent 
an  example." 


CHAPTER  XL 

March  for  Saltillo. — Our  Treatment. — Meet  Captain  Fitzgerald,  Van 
Ness,  and  others  in  Prison.  —  Their  Condition. — Arrival  of  Colonel 
Barragan  with  our  Prisoners. — We  march  for  San  Luis  Potosi. — Arri- 
val at  Salado. — Our  Men  arrive  at  Aqua  Nuevo. — Captain  Dimmit. — 
His  Death. — Barragan  arrives  with  our  Men  at  Salado. — Concerted 
Attack  upon  the  Guards. — The  Charge  and  Victory  at  Salado. — Order 
to  shoot  us. — Narrow  Escape. — Arrival  at  Cidral. — Narrow  Escape 
from  the  Populace. — Narrow  Escape  from  our  new  Guards. — Arrival 
at  Mataguala. — Treatment  there. — Report  of  the  Battle  of  Salado. 

January  28th.  We  left  Monterey  under  charge 
of  Captain  Ugartechia  and  a  troop  of  cavalry  for 
Saltillo,  a  city  containing  about  fifteen  thousand 
inhabitants,  and  seventy-five  English  miles  distant, 
where  we  arrived  on  the  30th.  Both  here  and  at 
Monterey  we  were  treated  kindly  by  several  Euro- 


MEET  SOME  OF  OUR  PRISONERS.       141 

peans  who  visited  us  in  our  prison.  Upon  our 
arrival  at  Saltillo,  we  were  first  quartered  at  a  mis- 
erable, filthy  cavalry  barracks,  against  which  we 
protested  in  the  strongest  terms,  when  we  were 
moved  to  an  infantry  quartel  not  much  better.  At 
this  quartel  we  found  Captain  Archibald  Fitzgerald, 
Mr.  George  Van  Ness,  Thomas  Hancock,  Norman 
Woods,  Miblem  Harrell,  and  John  Higgerson:  the 
three  former  were  taken  at  San  Antonio  on  the 
11th  of  September  previous,  and  detained  at  San 
Fernando  as  Santa  Fe  prisoners,  by  order  of  the 
government,  to  be  shot ;  but,  through  the  interces- 
sion of  General  Woll,  were  pardoned,  and  sent  on 
with  the  three  latter,  who  were  badly  wounded  at 
Captain  Dawson's  defeat  on  the  18th  of  September. 
We  found  these  men,  and  particularly  Woods,  in  a 
bad  condition,  but  by  giving  him  warm  clothes  and 
good  nursing  he  rapidly  recovered.  He  must  have 
died  very  soon  without  such  assistance.  Upon  ap- 
plication to  the  governor,  Van  Ness  was  permitted 
to  accompany  our  party  as  interpreter,  and  the  other 
five  turned  in  with  our  men,  who  arrived  here  on 
the  5th  of  February  under  charge  of  Colonel  Bar- 
ragan. 

Captain  Fitzgerald,  Van  Ness,  and  Hancock  in- 
formed us  that,  while  they  were  detained  as  Santa  Fe 
prisoners  at  San  Fernando,  by  order  of  the  govern- 
ment, to  be  shot,  the  first  news  which  they  received 
of  General  Somerville's  movements  was  from  Henry 
Clay  Davis,  late  of  Kentucky,  and  a  man  by  the 


142  TEXIAN    TRAITORS. 

name  of  M'Beth,  who  were  put  in  the  same  prison 
with  them.  These  two  men  had  taken  leave  of  us 
at  Laredo,  to  return,  as  they  said,  to  San  Antonio, 
but  instead  of  which  deserted  to  the  Mexican  army 
at  San  Fernando,  140  miles  north,  carrying  the 
Mexican  commander  letters  from  the  alcalde  of  La- 
redo, and  giving  information  of  the  Texian  move- 
ments. General  Reyes,  the  Mexican  commander 
at  that  place,  always  doubting  of  treachery,  incar- 
cerated these  renegades  in  the  same  prison  with 
the  above-named  gentlemen,  where  they  were  kept 
eleven  days,  until  he  was  assured  of  their  fidelity 
by  again  hearing  from  the  alcalde  of  Laredo  and  Col- 
onel Bravo,  the  Mexican  commandant  at  that  place. 
Upon  this  information  General  Reyes  released  them, 
and  gave  Davis  a  ball,  at  which  his  health  was 
drank  as  one  who  had  seen  the  error  of  his  ways 
by  deserting  the  "  Texian  adventurers"  and  giving 
in  his  allegiance  to  the  "  magnanimous"  Mexican 
nation.  We  have  alluded  to  this  circumstance  as 
the  first  and  last  instance  in  our  whole  revolution 
where  an  American,  born  and  raised  in  the  United 
States,  ever  deserted  our  standard  to  join  that  of 
our  Mexican  enemy,  and  it  should  be  a  warning 
to  others  against  a  too  intimate  Mexican  associa- 
tion ;  for,  as  ministers  plenipotentiary  are  subject 
to  be  Mexicanized,  so  are  humbler  individuals. 
These  young  men  had  lived  some  time  in  San 
Antonio,  and  had  acquired  much  of  Mexican  habit, 
with  a  consequent  corresponding  sympathy  which 
outbalanced  their  Texian  patriotism. 


ATTACK  ON  THE  GUARDS  MISCARRIES.     143 

I  have  remarked  that  whenever  a  citizen  of 
the  United  States  resides  long  enough  in  Mexico  to 
discard  his  suspenders,  and  tie  up  his  pantaloons 
with  a  red  band  around  the  waist,  cover  his  shoul- 
ders with  a  blanket,  and  eat  a  gill  of  red  pepper  at 
a  meal — beware  of  him !  he  will  both  lie  and  steal ; 
and  while  his  new  ethics  teach  him  to  filch  from  his 
neighbour's  pocket,  they  would  cause  him,  for  a  Ju- 
das reward,  to  sell  the  country  which  gave  him  life. 

Our  men,  under  charge  of  Colonel  Canales,  with 
six  hundred  infantry  and  cavalry  guards,  and  one 
piece  of  artillery,  took  up  the  line  of  march  from 
Matamoras  on  the  14th  January,  two  days  after  our 
party  had  left  that  place.  They  proceeded  to  the 
pass  Sacarte,  upon  the  Rio  St.  Juan,  without  any 
incident  worth  noting.  At  this  place  a  plan  of 
charging  the  guards  had  been  perfected,  but,  through 
some  misunderstanding  of  Captain  Cameron's  order, 
it  was  not  carried  out.  It  was  then  determined  to 
wait  until  they  reached  farther  into  the  mountains. 
They  arrived  at  Monterey  on  the  29th,  one  day 
after  the  departure  of  our  party,  and  remained  here 
until  the  2d  of  February,  when,  under  charge  of 
Colonel  Barragan  and  about  two  hundred  and  fifty 
guards,  they  marched  for  Saltillo.  February  2d, 
camped  at  St.  Catharine,  twelve  miles,  and  on  the 
3d  at  the  Rinconada,  twenty-four  miles.  Here  they 
intended  an  attack  upon  the  guards,  and  a  more  fa- 
vourable place  could  not  have  been  selected,  but  the 
increased  vigilance  of  those  in  charge  of  them  pre- 


144        EFFECTS    OF    MORPHINE    ON     4    MEXICAN. 

yented  it,  and  they  supposed  some  "  Judas"  had  be- 
trayed their  design  to  the  commander.  On  the  5th 
they  arrived  at  Saltillo,  and  were  quartered  at  a  dif- 
ferent barracks  from  us.  Colonel  Barragan  permit- 
ted several  of  our  men  to  visit  us  in  his  company. 

February  6th.  Captain  Ugartechia  took  up  the 
line  of  march  for  San  Luis  Potosi  with  our  party, 
and  on  the  7th  Colonel  Barragan  followed  with  the 
main  body  of  our  men.  Here  Colonel  B.  increased 
his  guards  with  a  company  of  infantry  known  as 
the  "Red  Caps."  Our  march  was  interrupted  with 
no  more  than  the  ordinary  "  incidents  of  travel"  un- 
til we  reached  the  hacienda  Salado,  forty  leagues' 
distant.  This  road  was  over  a  barren  country,  very 
destitute  of  vegetation,  and  supplied  from  deep  wells 
of  brackish  water,  drawn  up  by  mules  working  a 
very  simply-contrived  drum,  with  buckets  attached 
to  a  broad  leathern  strap  or  hair  ropes.  This  place 
we  reached  on  the  9th,  when  Captain  Ugartechia 
complaining  much  of  his  head  and  the  want  of 
sleep,  Dr.  Shepherd  gave  him  some  morphine.  This 
had  a  singular  effect  upon  him.  He  curled  himself 
up  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  would  not  speak  above 
a  whisper,  concluded  he  must  die,  and  sent  an  ex- 
press back  to  Saltillo  for  his  sister  and  another  phy- 
sician. In  this  situation  he  lay  until  the  arrival  of 
our  men  on  the  evening  of  the  10th,  when  we  were 
turned  over  to  Captain  Romano  ;  the  main  body  of 
our  men,  under  Colonel  Barragan,  having  marched 
from  Saltillo  on  the  7th,  one  day  after  our  party 


DEATH    OF    CAPTAIN    DIMMIT.  145 

arrived  at  the  hacienda  Aqua  Nuevo  (New  Water), 
being  twenty-four  miles,  the  first  day.  This  was 
another  favourable  place  to  charge  their  guards,  and 
it  was  in  contemplation ;  but  from  the  soreness  of 
the  men's  feet  and  other  causes,  it  was  again  de- 
ferred. 

This  place  is  also  worthy  of  note,  from  the  fact 
that  here  our  lamented  countryman,  Captain  Philip 
Dimmit,  poisoned  himself,  having  determined  so  to 
act  rather  than  die  by  the  hands  of  his  enemies. 
Captain  Dimmit's  name  is  too  intimately  connected 
with  Goliad  and  our  first  effort  at  independence  to 
be  passed  over  with  indifference.  We  knew  him 
long  and  intimately  as  a  brave  man  and  a  devoted 
patriot.  When  he  was  villanously  abducted  from 
his  home,  through  the  perfidious  treachery  of  his 
own  countrymen,  the  Mexicans  knew  the  value  of 
their  prize  too  well  to  treat  him  slightly.  Poor 
Dimmit  knew  full  well  that  the  "  Goliad  Declaration 
of  Independence'  would  seal  his  fate.  He  and  his 
few  companions,  with  a  heroism  worthy  the  occa- 
sion, charged  their  guards,  and,  after  three  had  fallen 
by  his  own  hands,  yielded  to  the  superiority  of 
numbers.  His  last  act  of  defiance,  after  invoking 
his  country's  justice  upon  his  betrayers  and  murder- 
ers in  a  strain  of  rare  eloquence,  was  to  die  as  he 
had  lived,  shouting  for  his  country  and  liberty ! 

February  10th.  Colonel  Barragan  arrived  at  the 
hacienda  Salado  with  our  men,  where  he  found 
Captain  Ugartechia  sick,  with  our  party.     We  had 

T 


146  ARRIVAL    AT    SALADO   WITH    TEXIANS. 

been  quartered  in  a  room  opening  upon  a  small 
courtyard,  in  which  our  guards  were  stationed. 
This  courtyard  adjoined  a  larger  one  on  the  south, 
from  which  it  was  separated  by  a  dividing  wall  of 
about  fifteen  feet  high,  and  in  the  latter  our  men 
were  quartered.  These  quarters  had  no  communi- 
cation with  ours  except  by  the  outer  gates.  Some 
few  of  our  men  obtained  permission  to  accompany 
Colonel  Barragan  to  visit  us.  Of  these  were  Cap- 
tain Ryan,  Dr.  Brennem,  Captain  Fitzgerald,  Mr. 
Maxwell,  and  Edwards.  Our  men  were  highly 
elated  at  coming  up  with  us ;  and  the  prospect  of 
our  uniting  with  them  in  an  attempt  to  go  home  at 
once  started  the  question  anew  of  charging  their 
guards.  The  men  who  visited  us  were  requested 
to  ascertain  our  opinions  as  to  its  practicability,  &c. 
Colonel  Fisher  was  opposed  to  the  charge,  but  sent 
word  to  Captain  Cameron  "  to  use  his  ow?i  good 
sense  in  the  matter."  I  was  in  favour  of  it,  as  I  had 
uniformly  been,  and  my  plan  of  attack  was  freely 
communicated  to  Captains  Ryan  and  Fitzgerald, 
and  Dr.  Brennem.  They  informed  me  that  their 
plan  was  to  charge  at  midnight.  I  opposed  this 
hour,  as  being  unpropitious  for  securing  the  horses 
of  the  cavalry,  as  they  would  most  probably  be  out 
grazing,  and  recommended  sunrise,  at  which  time 
the  horses  would  be  herded.  Captain  Reese  was 
opposed  to  the  "break,"  as  he  informed  me,  because 
he  thought  we  had  advanced  too  far  into  the  country. 
I  told  him  I  thought  there  would  be  no  danger ;  that 


ATTACK  UPON  THE  GUARDS.  147 

we  should  be  strong  enough  to  keep  the  road,  and 
beat  all  the  opposing  force  above  Guerrero ;  that 
Fitzgerald  and  Van  Ness  had  informed  me  the 
troops  from  San  Fernando  had  been  moved  down 
to  that  point  before  they  left  the  former  place  ;  that 
a  few  days  rapid  move  on  the  main  road  would  en- 
sure success. 

Our  usual  time  of  starting  in  the  morning  was 
half  an  hour  after  sunrise,  and  so  soon  as  the  main 
body  of  our  men  had  succeeded  in  driving  their 
guards,  Captain  Fitzgerald  was  to  lead  a  party 
around  the  buildings,  force  our  gate,  and  assist  us, 
if  necessary,  against  our  guards.  Captain  Romano, 
contrary  to  our  former  custom,  had  started  us  about 
eight  or  ten  minutes  previous  to  sunrise.  In  this 
time  we  had  proceeded  about  three  fourths  of  a 
mile,  when  the  sun  made  its  appearance  over  the 
mountains.  I  was  riding  by  the  side  of  my  old 
sailing-master,  Lyon,  and  remarked,  upon  seeing 
the  sun,  that  "  if  our  boys  were  going  to  do  any- 
thing, now  was  the  time."  I  had  barely  made  the 
remark  when  I  heard  the  first  gun.  I  knew  what 
it  meant,  and  exclaimed,  "  We  have  them  /"  The 
second,  third,  and  fourth  guns  were  fired  before 
Captain  Romano  noticed  it.  He  halted  us,  and 
sent  his  lieutenant,  Aredondo,  back  to  see  what 
was  the  matter.  Aredondo  galloped  back  a  few 
hundred  yards,  returned  in  great  haste,  and  report- 
ed that  the  Texians  had  charged  Colonel  Barragan, 
and  his  troops  were  flying  in  every  direction.    This, 


148  CRITICAL    MOMENT. 

however,  we  could  plainly  see  :  men,  women,  and 
children,  infantry  and  cavalry,  were  scampering  in 
every  direction,  hither  and  thither,  leaving  clouds 
of  dust  behind  them. 

Captain  Romano  ordered  us  on  from  the  scene  of 
action  at  full  gallop,  with  his  cavalry  lances  at  a 
charge  on  each  side  of  us.  After  going  two  or 
three  hundred  yards,  we  were  halted  and  made  to 
dismount.  The  firing  had  now  become  very  brisk, 
and  the  excitement  in  our  party  intense :  each  had 
his  speculations  as  to  the  result.  I  believed  from 
the  first  that  our  men  would  prevail,  with  a  loss  not 
exceeding  ten.  Colonel  Fisher  believed  that  the  at- 
tack was  injudicious,  and  the  whole  of  our  men  would 
be  killed.  Most  of  our  party  believed  with  me.  At 
length  a  short  pause  was  discernible  in  the  firing ; 
then  it  commenced  brisker  than  ever,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  another  pause,  which  was  quickly  succeed- 
ed by  a  loud  shout,  which  we  knew  to  be  Texian. 
This  shout  for  the  moment  quieted  our  excitement, 
but  it  was  to  be  quickly  succeeded  by  one  of  more 
interest  to  us.  At  this  time  a  lieutenant  came  up 
at  full  speed,  with  orders  from  Colonel  Barragan  to 
Captain  Romano  to  shoot  us  and  come  immediate- 
ly to  his  assistance.  Both  his  countenance  and 
actions  showed  determination  to  execute  the  order. 
He  ordered  his  men  to  reprime  their  escopetas  and 
make  ready,  which  was  instantly  done.  This  was 
a  critical  moment,  and  it  was  necessary  to  be  met 
with  coolness  and  promptness  upon  our  part.    Col- 


FORCED    MARCH    TO    CIDRAL.  149 

onel  Fisher  and  myself  asked  him  "  if  he  was  most 
bound  to  obey  the  orders  of  Governor  Ortega,  to 
take  us  to  Mexico,  or  any  subsequent  order  of  Col- 
onel Barragan;"  and  that  we  expected  "we  were 
in  the  hands  of  a  gentleman  and  a  soldier,  not  a 
murderer."  His  eyes  were  instantly  lowered  to  the 
pommel  of  his  saddle,  and  his  countenance  under- 
went hesitation,  change,  and  satisfaction  in  as  many 
seconds,  when  he  raised  himself  in  his  stirrups,  and, 
proudly  clapping  his  hand  upon  his  bosom,  ordered 
the  interpreter  to  say  to  the  gentlemen  "  that  they 
are  in  the  hands  of  a  gentleman  and  a  soldier,  and 
that  /  will  carry  out  Governor  Ortega's  orders." 
Thus  saying,  our  horses'  heads  were  wheeled  to- 
wards Mexico,  and  we  forced  on,  at  full  speed,  by 
the  lancers  on  each  side  of  us. 

Our  course  was  for  many  miles  through  a  broad, 
level  plain,  with  high  mountains  on  each  hand. 
Every  dust  rising  in  our  rear — and  we  could  see 
many  miles  upon  our  back  road — made  us  be- 
lieve that  our  lamented  friend,  Captain  Fitzgerald, 
with  a  party  of  our  men,  were  in  pursuit  to  rescue 
us.  This  Captain  F.  had  promised  to  do  the  pre- 
vious night,  in  the  event  of  our  leaving  before  the 
attack ;  and  the  hope  of  which  caused  us  to  desire 
a  slower  pace,  while  the  fear  of  it  impelled  Captain 
Romano  forward.  At  this  gait  we  were  hurried 
twenty  leagues  to  the  town  of  Cidral,  only  stopping 
once  for  water. 

We  arrived  at  Cidral,  which  is  a  mining  town, 


150  WOMEN    BETTER    THAN    MEN. 

containing  about  six  thousand  inhabitants,  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  evening ;  and,  notwithstanding  the 
rapid  gait  we  had  travelled,  the  news  from  Salado 
preceded  us.  Most  of  the  citizens  we  found  in  the 
street  and  public  square,  where  we  were  halted  sev- 
eral minutes.  Here  this  dirty  population  heaped 
upon  us  their  rich  vocabulary  of  epithets  :  a  favour- 
ite one  was  to  call  us  "  Jews ;"  for  this  ignorant  pop- 
ulation believe  that  every  nation  of  white  people 
who  do  not  speak  their  language,  and  are  not  of 
their  religion,  had  some  immediate  agency  in  killing 
their  beloved  Saviour.  The  only  compassion  we 
met  was  in  the  countenances  of  the  females.  In 
my  intercourse  with  the  world,  I  have  had  frequent 
occasion  to  observe  that  women  were  better  than 
men ;  in  Mexico  this  observation  is  forced  upon  you 
at  every  village. 

To  free  us  from  the  annoyance  of  the  populace^ 
Captain  Romano  ordered  us  to  dismount  and  go 
into  a  room,  around  which  he  placed  his  cavalry  to 
keep  off  the  crowd.  Here  we  remained  for  an  hour, 
and  were  refreshed  with  some  crackers,  cheese,  and 
a  bottle  of  vino  mascaL  a  common  brandy  made  of 
the  maguey  plant,  Agave  Americana.  Here  Captain 
Romano  determined  to  return  to  Salado,  to  assist,  if 
possible,  Colonel  Barragan,  and  our  party  were  turn- 
ed over  to  the  alcalde,  to  be  sent  immediately  on 
to  Mataguala,  a  city  of  fifteen  thousand  inhabitants, 
still  three  leagues  farther  ahead,  as  the  town  of 
Cidral  would  not  be  sufficient  protection  in  case  our 


ATTEMPT    AT    ASSASSINATION.  151 

men  were  to  pursue  us.  We  were  hurried  off  under 
a  guard  of  about  thirty  men,  who  were  the  most 
perfect  savages  we  ever  met  before  or  since. 

It  was  now  night,  with  a  fair  moonlight,  and  from 
every  demonstration  these  rascals  intended  to  assas- 
sinate us  before  we  reached  Mataguala.  On  one 
occasion  several  of  them  cocked  their  guns,  under 
pretence  of  shooting  Sailing-master  Lyon  for  not 
keeping  in  line,  but  were  prevented  by  the  interpret- 
er saying  that  he  was  a  sailor,  and  not  used  to  ri- 
ding. On  another  occasion  they  were  in  the  act 
of  thrusting  their  lances  through  Interpreter  Henrie, 
when  I  caught  his  horse  by  the  bridle  and  drew  him 
up  to  my  side.  In  this  situation,  Captain  Romano 
and  our  old  troop  came  up  at  full  speed  and  relieved 
us.  Captain  R.,  learning  the  intention  of  these  fel- 
lows after  they  had  left  Cidral,  changed  his  deter- 
mination of  returning  to  Salado,  and  came  to  our 
rescue.  Interpreter  Henrie,  knowing  more  of  the 
language  and  intentions  of  these  fellows,  informed 
me  that  we  were  to  be  shot,  and  said  that  he  wished 
to  die  as  gloriously  as  possible,  and  therefore  bor- 
rowed from  the  horn  of  my  saddle  a  flask  of  vino 
mascal,  into  which  he  looked  so  long  and  deep  that 
he  had  but  little  power  of  vision  left,  and  would  oc- 
casionally ride  up  against  the  guards.  In  this  situ- 
ation, they  were  about  to  spear  him,  when  the  timely 
arrival  of  Captain  Romano  prevented  it.  In  coming 
up,  our  old  guard,  who,  from  two  weeks'  travel  and 
intercourse  with,  had  formed  a  warm  attachment  for 


152  MEET    WITH    FRIENDS. 

us,  congratulated  us  upon  our  escape  from  these 
fellows. 

We  arrived  at  Mataguala  at  nine  o'clock  at  night, 
and  found  the  whole  population  abroad  to  see  us. 
We  were  hurried  through  the  crowd,  and  quartered 
at  a  meson,  tavern.  Next  morning  old  Colonel  D. 
Matias  d'Aquirre  came  to  see  us :  this  old  veteran 
treated  us  with  great  kindness,  ordered  us  to  be  re- 
moved to  better  quarters,  and  placed  under  special 
charge  of  a  humane  gentleman  and  an  accomplished 
scholar,  a  lawyer  by  profession,  D.  Manuel  Fernan- 
dez Palos.  During  our  three  days'  stay  in  this  city, 
we  were  furnished  from  the  table  of  this  gentleman 
with  every  luxury  the  city  could  afford. 

We  were  here  visited  by  all  persons  of  distinction, 
among  the  rest  the  priest,  a  gentleman  of  superior 
intelligence  and  liberal  feelings,  who  afterward  sent 
us  several  rich  viands  from  his  table  ;  also  the  Baron 
De  Kawinsky,  one  of  the  travelling  scientific  corps 
of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  a  gentleman  of  extensive 
acquirements,  who  has  been  for  several  years  ex- 
ploring the  northern  states  of  Mexico.  This  excel- 
lent old  gentleman  expressed  for  us  the  kind  feelings 
of  a  father,  and  upon  parting,  insisted  upon  our  taking 
some  of  his  excellent  tea,  which  we  highly  enjoyed 
during  our  trip  to  Mexico.  Upon  taking  leave  o.f 
him,  we  placed  in  his  hands  the  following  note. 

"Mataguala,  Feb.  14th,  1843. 
"  To  the  Baron  De  Kawinsky,  of  Russia. 

"  Sir, — As  prisoners  of  war  to  the  government  of 


BARRAGAN    DEFEATED.  153 

Mexico,  we  beg  to  tender  our  warmest  thanks  for 
the  kindness  which  you  have  manifested  towards  us 
during  our  short  acquaintance. 

"  In  prosecuting  your  scientific  researches,  should 
you  find  it  convenient  to  visit  our  young  republic, 
you  will  doubtless  find  many  objects  worthy  of  your 
notice,  and  the  gentlemen  of  our  country  will  be  hap- 
py to  extend  to  you  the  kind  feelings  of  your  hum- 
ble servants." 

On  our  first  arrival  at  Mataguala,  Captain  Ro- 
mano and  troop  went  back  to  see  what  had  become 
of  Colonel  Barragan,  and  we  were  turned  over  to 
the  authorities  of  the  place.  On  the  third  day  after 
he  returned  with  the  intelligence  that  our  men  had 
defeated  Barragan,  dispersed  his  troops,  took  his 
horses,  arms,  munitions  of  war,  and  money,  and 
made  their  way  homeward. 

In  leaving  Mataguala  on  February  15th,  which 
we  did  under  the  escort  of  the  first  gentlemen  of  the 
place,  we  addressed  Colonel  Aquirre  and  Don  Palos 
the  following  note: 

"  Mataguala,  Feb.  14th,  1843. 

"  To  Don  Matias  Martin  D'Aquirre  and  Don  > 
Manuel  Fernandez  Palos  and  others.      J 

"  Gentlemen, — Before  our  departure  from  your 
city,  we  beg  to  express  to  yourselves  particularly, 
and,  through  you,  to  the  officers  and  citizens  who 
have  had  us  in  charge,  our  heartfelt  gratitude  for  the 
many  kindnesses  extended  us  during  the  few  days 
we  have  remained  here. 

U 


154  KINDNESS    OF    COLONEL    d'aQUIRRE. 

"  To  conquer  in  the  field  of  battle  depends  much 
upon  the  chances  of  war;  to  temper  that  victory  with 
generosity  and  humanity  requires  the  exercise  of 
those  high  moral  qualities  which  constitute  man  su- 
perior to  all  other  creatures.  You,  sirs,  have  given 
us  a  bright  example  of  that  superiority. 

"  It  has  been  our  fortune  to  enter  your  country,  in 
solemn  duty  to  the  requirements  of  our  own,  as  po- 
litical enemies ;  we  fought  you  as  men,  and  since, 
through  the  chances  of  war,  we  have  become  your 
captives,  we  submit  with  the  philosophy  of  men. 

"  Please,  gentlemen,  accept  the  highest  consid- 
erations and  esteem  of  your  very  obedient  servants." 

The  good  old  colonel,  to  make  the  time  of  our 
party  the  lighter — for,  says  he,  "I  have  three  times 
been  a  prisoner"— sent  us  a  bundle  of  English  books 
from  his  hacienda,  which  met  us  on  the  road.  To 
fall  into  the  hands  of  such  an  officer  is  to  rob  war 
of  its  most  rugged  features  ;  and  if  the  young  officers 
of  the  Mexican  nation  had  half  the  sensibility,  mag- 
nanimity, and  humanity  of  the  old  ones,  this  war 
might  have  been  conducted  with  the  most  high-toned 
spirit  of  chivalry  ;  whereas,  their  repeated  acts  of 
perfidy,  treachery,  and  brutality  must  force  us  to  re- 
taliate, as  the  only  recource  of  justice  and  safety. 

We  return  to  the  11th  of  February,  1843,  with  a 
national  pride  which  no  other  circumstance  of  our 
Revolution  can  inspire ;  and  it  should  be  an  ever- 
memorable  day  in  the  history  of  Texian  liberty, 


CHARGE  ON  THE  GUARDS  SUCCESSFUL.    155 

alike  honourable  to  the  country  for  the  spirit  in 
which  that  glorious  movement  was  planned  and 
executed.  As  our  men  advanced  farther  into  the 
country,  the  more  oppressive  became  the  conduct 
of  those  under  whose  charge  they  were.  On  sun- 
dry occasions,  the  Mexican  soldiers  had  been  per- 
mitted to  beat  several  of  them :  this  was  in  such 
gross  violation  of  our  articles  of  capitulation,  and 
afforded  such  a  precious  foretaste  of"  Mexican  mag- 
nanimity'' that  they  determined  not  to  let  slip  this 
last  opportunity  of  regaining  their  liberty ;  and  the 
prospect  of  having  their  officers  with  them  in  the 
glorious  enterprise  determined  the  blow.  Among  the 
privates  foremost  in  the  charge,  as  well  as  in  bring- 
ing about  the  result — and  to  their  lasting  honour 
we  record  their  names — were  Dr.  R.  F.  Brennem, 
S.  H.  Walker,  J.  D.  Cooke,  Colonel  William  F. 
Wilson,  Patrick  Lyons,  and  others.  The  officers 
were  generally  in  favour  of  the  attempt;  and  at  the 
appointed  time,  the  lamented  Cameron,  with  a 
quiet  coolness  peculiar  to  him  in  trying  emergen- 
cies, raised  his  hat,  and  giving  it  a  gentle  flourish 
in  the  air,  said,  in  a  distinct  tone,  a  little  mixed 
with  his  Highland  brogue,  "Well,  hoys,  we  will  go 
it!"  Thus  saying,  and  suiting  the  action  to  the 
word,  he  grappled  one  of  the  sentinels  at  the  inner 
door  of  their  prison-yard,  while  S.  H.  Walker  seiz- 
ed the  other.  It  was  the  work  of  an  instant  to  up- 
set and  disarm  these,  and  get  possession  of  the  outer 
court,  where   the   arms   and  cartridge  boxes  were 


156  LIST    OF    THE    KILLED    AND    WOUNDED. 

guarded  by  one  hundred  and  fifty  infantry.  These 
men  were  quickly  driven  out  or  made  to  surrender; 
and  while  our  men  were  arming  themselves  and  se- 
curing ammunition,  the  cavalry  had  formed  in  front 
of  the  outer  gate,  which  was  also  guarded  by  the 
company  of  "  Red  Caps."  In  charging  through  this 
gate  to  drive  this  company  and  the  cavalry,  poor 
Doctor  Brennem  and  Patrick  Lyons  fell,  and  sev- 
eral others  were  wounded.  That  portion  of  the 
cavalry  which  was  mounted  quickly  fell  back  be- 
yond the  reach  of  our  fire,  while  the  "Red  Caps"  re- 
treated round  the  main  wall  of  the  buildings  to  the 
south,  through  the  gate  into  the  courtyard  which 
our  party  had  just  before  left.  A  portion  of  our 
men  pressed  around  to  force  this  gate,  believing  still 
that  we  were  in  our  quarters.  Here  Captain  Fitz- 
gerald received  his  death-wound,  and  John  Stans- 
bury,  quite  a  boy,  had  his  left  eye  shot  out.  The 
company  of  "  Red  Caps"  soon  capitulated,  and  gave 
up  their  arms ;  the  only  condition  which  our  men 
required  of  Colonel  Barragan,  in  releasing  them, 
was,  that  our  wounded  should  be  treated  kindly. 

We  had  three  killed,  Dr.  Brennem,  Lyon,  and 
Rice  ;  Captain  Fitzgerald  and  John  Higgerson 
mortally  wounded,  and  died  soon  after ;  Captain 
J.  R.  Baker,  privates  Stansbury,  Hancock,  Trehern, 
and  Harvey,  wounded.  The  enemy's  loss  was  nine 
or  ten  killed,  and  many  more  badly  wounded.  From 
the  difficulty  of  getting  arms  in  the  commencement 
of  the  action,  it  was  not  possible  that  more  than  one 


A    NEGRO    "SPECULATOR."  157 

half  of  our  two  hundred  and  fourteen  men,  with  the 
exception  of  those  who  fought  with  brickbats,  could 
have  been  engaged. 

When  the  main  body  of  our  men  were  marched 
from  Matamoras,  a  negro  fellow  by  the  name  of 
Sawney,  who  some  years  before  had  absconded 
from  Texas,  and  taken  up  his  abode  in  that  city, 
seeing  that  it  was  a  good  chance  for  him  to  specu- 
late off  of  his  old  acquaintances,  followed  them  on  to 
this  place,  and  on  the  route  swindled  all  who  dealt 
with  him  for  chile,  tortillas,  frijoles,  &c.  No  soon- 
er, however,  did  the  Texians  charge  their  guards,  than 
he  exclaimed,  "  This  is  no  place  for  Sawney !"  and, 
very  wisely,  did  not  wait  to  suit  the  action  to  the 
words,  for  his  double-quick  time  had  already  prece- 
ded his  prudent  conclusion  ;  and  well  it  did,  as  he 
would  have  paid  dearly  for  his  peculations  and  in- 
solence had  he  been  taken. 

Thus  it  was  that  the  Texians  gave  the  world  an- 
other evidence  of  their  superiority  over  the  Mexi- 
cans, when  one  hundred  unarmed  men  charged  three 
hundred  with  arms,  beat  them,  disarmed  them,  and 
then  turned  them  loose  as  harmless  things. 


158  MARCH    HOMEWARD. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Our  Men  take  up  the  March  for  Home. — Departure  from  Plan  of  Retreat 
by  turning  into  the  Mountains. — Unexampled  Suffering. — Killing  their 
Horses  for  Food. — Many  Die,  and  others  Surrender. — Marched  back 
to  Saltillo.— March  to  Salado. — Decimation,  and  dying  Words. — Our 
"Wounded,  and  those  who  remained  with  them. — March  from  Matagua- 
la. — Arrival  at  Count  Zivyes.  —  Kind  Treatment. — Arrival  at  San 
Luis  Potosi. — Treatment  there. — Correspondence  with  the  Governor. 
— Notes  to  Captains  Romano  and  Reyes. — The  Valley  of  San  Luis, 
Mode  of  drawing  Water,  &c. 

At  10  o'clock  A.M.,  one  hundred  and  ninety- 
three  of  our  men  took  up  the  line  of  march  home- 
ward, leaving  eighteen  behind,  including  the  wound- 
ed, besides  three  killed.  At  12  o'clock  at  night 
they  reached  the  hacienda  San  Salvador,  a  distance 
of  fifty-three  miles;  bought  corn,  and  fed  their  hor- 
ses :  proceeded  twelve  miles  farther  on,  and  slept 
about  two  hours  before  daybreak.  The  remnant  of 
the  enemy's  cavalry,  under  Colonel  Barragan,  which 
had  escaped  from  Salado,  kept  in  sight  in  the  rear, 
but  manifested  no  disposition  to  come  near. 

February  12th.  They  marched  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, leaving  the  Saltillo  road  at  10  o'clock  A.M., 
and  bearing  their  course  to  the  left  for  the  Zacete- 
car  road,  which  they  struck  in  about  ten  miles ; 
thence  turning  to  the  left  for  the  purpose  of  obtain- 
ing water  at  a  hacienda  then  in  sight,  they  found 
the  water-tank  near  the  house,  which  was  defended 
by  a  few  regular  troops,  who  hoisted  a  red  flag,  and 


CAPTURE   A   SPY.  159 

commenced  a  fire  upon  them  at  about  two  hundred 
yards  distant.  Captain  Cameron,  having  determin- 
ed not  to  be  detained  by  any  engagement  which 
could  be  avoided,  filed  to  the  right,  receiving  no  oth- 
er injury  except  having  one  horse  wounded.  He  di- 
rected his  course  northward  to  a  trail  which  he 
discovered  leading  over  the  mountain,  which  was 
very  rough.  In  descending,  found  water  enough  for 
a  drink  all  round,  which  was  truly  a  God-send,  as 
we  he  had  been  twenty  hours  without  a  drop.  In 
six  miles  came  to  water  at  a  raneho,  where  we 
found  the  men  in  arms,  but  did  not  molest  them  : 
inquiring  the  Comargo  road,  we  proceeded  on  with- 
out any  intention  of  taking  it :  continued  our  course 
west,  and  after  descending  a  mountain  into  a  deep 
valley,  at  3  o'clock  in  the  morning  laid  down  to 
rest,  and  here  took  a  Mexican  spy. 

February  13th.  Marched  early,  taking  the  spy 
with  us,  course  still  west ;  at  eight  miles  came  to 
water,  and  thence  proceeded  on ;  struck  the  Mont- 
clova  road,  leading  from  Saltillo,  about  thirty -five 
miles  from  the  latter  place.  Here  we  encountered 
a  European,  a  friend  of  ours,  who  told  our  troops 
by  all  means  to  keep  the  road,  directing  them  where 
they  would  be  well  received  ahead.  Had  the  ad- 
vice of  this  man  been  kept,  the  whole  party  would 
doubtless  have  succeeded  in  reaching  their  homes ; 
but  our  men,  from  sad  experience,  had  been  taught 
to  believe  that  treachery  was  in  every  mouth  in 
Mexico,  and  the  more  timid  insisted  upon  leaving 


160  TAKE    TO    THE    MOUNTAINS. 

the  road  and  taking  to  the  mountains.  At  about  12 
o'clock  M.  crossed  a  small  creek,  and  sent  Interpreter 
Brennem  with  our  Mexican  spy  to  buy  some  beef 
and  corn  from  a  rancho  near  by,  where  the  Mexi- 
can was  detained  and  Brennem  ordered  off,  other- 
wise he  would  be  fired  upon.  Cameron  marched 
within  a  gunshot  of  the  rancho,  not  molesting  any- 
thing, when  a  woman  came  out  and  inquired  "  if 
any  of  JordavUs  men  were  along ;"  and  being  told 
"  there  were,"  she  replied  that  "  if  they  would  vouch 
for  the  good  conduct  of  the  rest,  the  whole  should 
be  accommodated  at  the  rancho  with  whatever  they 
wished."  They,  however,  continued  their  course 
without  returning  an  answer,  when  very  soon  after 
the  proprietor  of  the  rancho  overtook  them,  and 
expressed  regret  that  he  had  mistaken  their  inten- 
tions, and  pointed  out  a  good  place  near  the  road 
to  graze  ^nd  rest  their  horses.  At  sunset  again 
they  took  up  the  line  of  march,  but  left  the  road  at 
8  o'clock  to  repose,  when  they  were  fired  on  by  a 
small  party  of  Mexicans.  Proceeding  a  little  farther, 
Captain  Cameron  was  influenced  to  leave  the  road 
entirely  and  take  to  the  mountains,  contrary  to  his 
instructions  and  his  own  better  judgment,  as  we 
have  before  stated,  but  induced  to  do  so  by  the 
more  timid  of  the  officers  and  men. 

February  14th.  Directed  their  course  through 
the  mountains;  travelled  hard,  making  little  progress, 
the  country  being  too  rough  for  the  horses  to  get 
on,  except  with  slow  pace ;  found  no  water,  and 


:'WM^m.j    s& 


t    >..}!.,     .1 


■ 


■'■■■-■■  lA 


!.;fit;.j:,:i." 


KILL   THEIR   HORSES   FOR   FOOD.  161 

camped  for  the  night  in  a  deep  ravine.  This  day 
they  passed  a  shepherd  with  a  large  flock  of  sheep, 
who  informed  them  that  they  would  find  no  water 
in  the  direction  they  were  travelling,  which  should 
have  been  a  sufficient  warning  to  return  to  the  road. 
February  15th.  Some  of  the  men  found  water 
about  one  and  a  half  miles  from  camp.  Here  they 
determined  to  kill  their  fattest  horses  and  mules, 
jerk  the  meat  for  food,  and  take  it  on  foot.  The 
saddle  flaps  were  turned  into  sandals  to  protect 
their  feet  from  the  rocks  and  thorns.  Here  was  a 
scene  of  grand  moral  sublimity  :  freemen,  who  for 
the  love  of  country  and  liberty  had  voluntarily  re- 
duced themselves  to  the  last  state  of  human  suffer- 
ance, still  cheerful  under  the  bright  hope  of  liberty ; 
and  when  pressed  by  nature's  extremest  wants,  put- 
ting their  knives  into  the  hearts'  blood  of  their  good 
horses  with  a  melancholy  regret  which  showed 
they  had  no  option !  So,  having  stationed  sentinels 
upon  the  peaks  of  the  highest  adjoining  mountains, 
they  led  their  horses  and  asses  down  into  the  ra- 
vine, and  commenced  the  mournful  task.  In  doing 
so,  no  language  can  describe  the  feelings  of  these 
bold  men — men  who  in  battle  had  killed  their  scores 
of  Mexicans  without  winking — when  they  stood 
with  unsheathed  knives  beside  their  faithful  animals, 
they  found  that  their  bursting  hearts  had  unnerved 
their  arms.  Many  turned  from  the  effort  and 
wept,  while  others,  as  much  affected,  performed  the 
bloody  deed  in  conscientious  duty  to  their  families. 

X 


162  MORE    SPIES. 

their  country,  and  liberty.  The  lamentable  groans 
of  the  poor  horses,  as  the  keen  steel  would  press  to 
the  heart's  core,  was  distressingly  painful  to  hear. 
Some,  in  the  agonies  of  death,  would  squeal  and 
flounder,  while  others  would  seem  to  look  upon 
their  masters  in  deep  sorrow,  and  press  against  the 
fatal  blade.  This  never-to-be-forgotten  scene  was 
the  work  of  a  portion  of  this  day,  as  some  built 
scaffolds  with  fire  underneath  to  dry  the  meat,  while 
others  butchered,  and  some  went  with  gourds  still 
deeper  into  the  ravine  for  water.  At  3  o'clock  P. 
M.  the  water  was  so  nearly  exhausted  that  the  men 
could  not  fill  their  gourds,  when  the  march  was  re- 
commenced. At  10  o'clock  P.M.  camped  in  a  deep 
ravine  without  water. 

February  16th.  The  course  of  our  men  still 
north.  This  day  several  were  left  on  the  road  ex- 
hausted for  the  want  of  water,  and  here  they  com- 
menced, unfortunately,  the  use  of  the  palmetto  juice 
as  a  substitute. 

February  17th.  Marched  early  in  the  morning. 
At  12  o'clock  M.  discovered  some  Mexican  spies 
in  a  large  valley,  the  course  of  our  men  being  north- 
ward across  it.  At  9  o'clock  encamped  without 
water,  a  number  of  our  men  keeping  on,  and  bear- 
ing more  to  the  eastward  in  hopes  of  finding  some 
spring. 

February  18th.  No  signal  from  any  of  the  wa- 
ter-hunters :  the  course  still  across  the  valley.  Now 
much    dissatisfaction    prevailed   as   to    the    course 


SUFFERINGS    FROM   WANT    OF   WATER.  163 

most  likely  to  find  water.  Most  of  the  men  were 
now  unable  to  travel,  and  halted  to  rest,  when  Cap- 
tain Cameron,  with  about  fifty  men,  continued  on  a 
short  distance,  bearing  more  to  the  west.  They 
also  had  to  stop  during  the  heat  of  the  day.  At 
this  time  his  party  were  also  undetermined  what 
course  to  take,  as  several  parties  had  been  left  be- 
hind, and  sent  out  in  different  directions  to  find  wa- 
ter. The  main  body,  as  they  scattered  over  the 
valley  to  screen  themselves  from  the  burning  sun, 
would  spread  their  blankets  upon  the  thorn-bushes 
and  get  underneath  them.  They  now  would  fain 
have  drank 

"  The  stale  of  horses,  and  the  gilded  puddle 
Which  beast  would  cough  at :" 

but  neither  had  they  :  their  good  horses,  too,  had 
paid  the  tribute  of  their  lives.  In  vain  did  they 
recollect  Mark  Antony's  sufferings  in  the  Alps,  and 
the  Arab  tales  of  taking  drink  from  the  bowels  of 
their  faithful  camels  :  it  was  but  to  augment  their 
own  sufferings.  In  the  delirium  of  consuming  fe- 
vers they  sought 

"  The  roughest  berry  on  the  rudest  hedge." 

Some  were  chewing  and  eating  negro-head  and 
prickly-pear  leaves,  to  produce  moisture  in  their 
mouths,  but  these  astringents  greatly  aggravated 
their  sufferings ;  while  others,  with  tongues  so 
parched  and  swollen  that  they  could  not  close  their 
mouths,  were  scratching  in  the  shade  of  bushes  for 
cool  earth  to  apply  to  their  throats  and  stomachs ; 


164  DECEIVED    INTO    A    MEXICAN    CAMP. 

yet,  ,even  yet,  their  sufferings  were  to  be  increased. 
Wild  delirium  seized  upon  those  who  had  most 
freely  used  the  astringent  plants,  and  in  their  last 
agony  they  had  recourse  to  their  own  urinary  se- 
cretion. This  was  drinking  living  fire  !  and  this 
they  knew,  for  many  were  men  of  education  ;  but 
still  they  drank  and  drank  !  Several  expired,  and 
all  prayed  for  death  to  relieve  them.  To  all  who 
may  chance  to  see  these  pages,  and  hereafter  be  in 
a  similar  situation,  either  by  land  or  sea,  recollect 
these  facts,  that  it  is  far  better  to  die  without  this 
last  recourse,  for  the  phosphate  of  lime  contained 
in  this  liquid  produces  a  consuming  agony  far  worse 
than  death  without  it. 

At  1  o'clock  P.M.  discovered  a  large  smoke  to 
the  right,  and  at  first  supposed  it  to  be  a  signal  from 
some  of  their  water-hunters,  and  sent  a  messenger 
to  Captain  Cameron  to  inform  him.  At  this  time, 
most  of  the  men,  from  pure  inability  to  carry  them, 
threw  away  their  arms,  and  late  in  the  evening 
started  for  the  smoke.  Some  would  stop  to  get  the 
juice  of  plants  to  keep  them  from  expiring,  while 
every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  others  would  have 
to  rest.  About  8  o'clock  at  night  those  in  ad- 
vance approached  near  enough  to  the  fires  to  ascer- 
tain it  to  be  a  Mexican  cavalry  camp.  They  en- 
deavoured to  get  around  it,  but  found  the  pass 
ahead  of  them  guarded  by  another  camp  of  the  en- 
emy. It  was  now  daylight,  and  our  men,  scattered, 
exhausted,  and  without  arms,  had  no  other  alter- 


SURRENDER.  165 

native  but  to  surrender  to  a  force  which,  if  they 
had  kept  the  road,  as  was  the  original  plan,  they 
could  have  easily  beaten  ;  and  had  they  pursued 
the  original  plan,  at  this  time  they  would  have  been 
safe  in  Texas.  Before,  however,  Captain  Cameron 
surrendered  his  party  to  Governor-general  Mexier, 
he  demanded  and  received  the  positive  promise  that 
all  should  be  treated  as  "prisoners  of  ivar"  and,  so 
far  as  he  was  concerned,  they  were  so  treated. 

February  19th.  The  Mexicans  continued  to 
bring  our  men  in  by  small  parties.  They  remain- 
ed here  until  the  22 d,  by  which  time  they  had  one 
hundred  and  thirty  four  of  our  men  prisoners,  and 
then  marched  for  Saltillo.  These  Mexicans  show- 
ed humanity  in  not  letting  our  men  drink  too  much 
water,  which,  if  they  had  permitted,  must  have  pro- 
ved fatal.  They  also  furnished  them  with  plenty 
of  beef,  and  a  small  quantity  of  wood  to  cook  it 
with ;  but,  being  tied  with  rawhide  cords  in  pairs, 
and  having  the  use  of  only  one  hand,  they  made 
but  poor  cooks. 

February  23d,  being  the  second  day  from  the 
pass  in  the  mountains,  they  reached  a  rancho,  where 
they  found  Dr.  M'Math,  Holderman,  and  Tawney. 
Here  they  remained  on  the  24th  and  25th,  when 
about  thirty  more  of  our  men  were  brought  in.  The 
nights  now  being  cold,  the  Mexicans  having  robbed 
our  men  of  money,  blankets,  and  clothing,  they  suf- 
fered greatly. 

February    26th.     Marched    twenty    miles,    and 


166  PUT    IN    IRONS. 

camped  in  a  cowpen  at  a  rancho.  Now  our  pris- 
oners had  increased  to  one  hundred  and  sixty,  and 
the  sick  were  permitted  to  ride  upon  "burros"  (jack- 
asses). 

February  27th.  Our  men  were  whipped  several 
times  for  untying  the  rawhide  cords  which  sorely 
bound  their  limbs.  Marched  twenty-four  miles  to 
San  Antonio,  where  the  rawhide  cords  were  ex- 
changed for  iron  handcuffs.  Notwithstanding  this 
precaution,  the  Mexicans  showed  great  apprehen- 
sion lest  another  charge  would  be  made  upon 
them,  for  they  would  not  allow  the  Texians  to  stand 
up  in  camp.  Under  all  these  cruelties,  our  men  bore 
up  with  astonishing  fortitude.  They  received  their 
irons  with  smiles,  promised  a  fair  remuneration 
the  first  opportunity,  and  concluded  the  evening's 
entertainment  by  telling  old  tales  and  singing,  to 
the  utter  astonishment  of  their  captors. 

February  28th.  They  marched  twenty  miles, 
and  encamped  at  bad  water.  March  1st.  Started 
early ;  got  no  water  until  they  reached  the  suburbs 
of  the  town,  where  for  the  first  time  they  were  per- 
mitted to  wash  their  faces,  which  were,  as  one  may 
easily  imagine,  awfully  dirty.  Here  they  were  halt- 
ed for  the  governor  to  come  up,  while  great  prepar- 
ations were  making  in  the  city  to  receive  him.  Our 
men  were  marched  in  under  the  ringing  of  bells,  the 
firing  of  crackers,  &c,  and  kept  standing  in  the 
public  square  during  the  delivery  of  the  victor's  eu- 
logium ;  after  which  they  were  marched  into  their 


DEATH    OF    BRYAN.  167 

filthy  prison,  infested  with  vermin,  without  anything 
this  day  to  eat. 

March  2d.  Received  their  welcome  breakfast  at 
10  o'clock.  3d.  Waters  and  Torry  were  brought 
in  and  ironed  together  ;  also  the  two  Sargeants,  who 
had  been  several  days  in  town.  5th.  Ten  more  of 
our  men  brought  in.  On  the  following  day  receiv- 
ed a  donation  of  tobacco  from  a  citizen— a  most 
welcome  present.  7th.  Private  Ackerman  was 
brought  in ;  had  reached  within  sixty  miles  of  the 
Rio  Grande  before  he  was  taken.  9th.  Petitioned 
the  governor  for  more  rations,  and  to  one  meal  per 
day  he  added  coffee.  This  evening,  B.  Bryan,  an 
amiable  young  man  and  a  good  soldier,  died  from  a 
cold  received  in  sleeping  without  a  blanket.  10th. 
Nothing  important  occurred,  except  the  comet  was 
discernible,  which  was  at  first  seen  a  few  nights 
previous,  and  which  made  the  superstitious  Mexi- 
cans very  uneasy,  for  they  are  ever  expecting  some- 
thing terrible  to  overtake  their  misdeeds.  12th. 
They  were  visited  in  prison  by  some  Americans 
and  Lipan  Indians,  who  were  not  permitted  to 
speak  with  the  men.  To-day  five  of  the  sick  were 
baptized  by  a  priest,  and  these  men  were  afterward 
treated  with  more  kindness  by  the  citizens.  They 
refused  to  render  poor  Bryan  any  assistance,  be- 
cause he  would  not  be  baptized  by  them,  but  let 
him  die  for  want  of  necessaries.  They  now  learn- 
ed that  an  order  had  arrived  from  Mexico  to  shoot 
every  tenth  man,  which  the  governor  and  citizens 


168    SANTA  ANNA  ORDERS  THE  MEN  SHOT. 

refused  to  execute,  and  petitions  were  sent  back 
praying  that  they  might  be  released,  both  on  ac- 
count of  their  magnanimous  conduct  at  Salado  and 
on  their  retreat.  Captain  Cameron  was  now  treat- 
ed with  unusual  kindness,  the  Mexicans  in  Saltillo 
declaring  that  they  loved  him  for  his  bravery  and 
magnanimity.  18  th.  Joseph  Watkins  and  Wright 
were  brought  in,  found  near  Montclova,  having  laid 
down  to  die  for  the  want  of  water ;  were  taken  to 
the  town  of  Quarto  Sinicas,  where  they  were  treat- 
ed kindly,  after  having  been  robbed  of  everything 
they  had.  On  the  19th  and  20th  the  examination 
of  our  interpreters  took  place  about  the  attack  at 
Salado,  Colonel  Barragan's  conduct,  &c,  &c. 

March  21st.  The  cavalry  arrived  from  San  Luis 
Potosi  to  guard  our  men  to  the  city  of  Mexico.  In 
the  mean  time,  an  order  had  reached  Saltillo  from 
Santa  Anna  to  shoot  the  whole  of  our  men,  which 
was  also  disobeyed  by  Governor  Mexier. 

On  the  22d  they  took  up  the  line  of  march  under 
command  of  Colonel  Ortis.  That  night  they  reach- 
ed Aqua  Nuevo. 

On  the  23d  marched  fourteen  leagues  to  San  Sal- 
vador. Here  their  handcuffs  were  examined,  being 
ironed  in  pairs,  a  right  and  left  hand  of  each  two 
closely  fastened  with  large  irons,  and  the  sick  also 
ironed.  Now  they  began  to  suspect  something 
wrong,  but  still  hoped  otherwise. 

On  the  24th  marched  eleven  leagues.  On  the 
25th  marched  early,  and  arrived  at  the  Salado  about 


EVERY  TENTH  MAN  SHOT.  169 

2  o  clock  P.M.  Soon  after  they  arrived,  our  men 
received  the  melancholy  intelligence  that  they  were 
to  be  decimated,  and  each  tenth  man  shot. 

It  was  now  too  late  to  resist  this  horrible  order. 
Oar  men  were  closely  ironed  and  drawn  up  in  front 
of  all  their  guards,  with  arms  in  readiness  to  fire. 
Could  they  have  known  it  previously,  they  would 
have  again  charged  their  guards,  and  made  them 
dearly  pay  for  this  last  perfidious  breach  of  national 
faith.  It  was  now  too  late  !  A  manly  gloom  and 
a  proud  defiance  pervaded  all  countenances.  They 
had  but  one  alternative,  and  that  was  to  invoke  their 
country's  vengeance  upon  their  murderers,  consign 
their  souls  to  God,  and  die  like  men.  Could  these 
martyrs  in  liberty's  cause,  who  so  proudly  yielded 
up  their  lives  for  their  country,  have  known  that 
their  President  had  endorsed  their  execution  by  the 
most  villanous  of  all  falsehoods,  declaring  them  brig- 
ands— great  God  !  what  would  have  been  their  feel- 
ings ! 

The  decimator,  Colonel  Domingo  Huerta,  who 
was  especially  nominated  to  this  black  deed  after 
Governor  Mexier  refused  its  execution,  had  arrived 
at  Salado  ahead  of  our  men.  The  "  Red-cap"  com- 
pany were  to  be  their  executioners;  those  men 
whose  lives  had  been  so  humanely  spared  by  our 
men  at  this  place  on  the  11th  of  February. 

The  decimation  took  place  by  the  drawing  of 
black  and  white  beans  from  a  small  earthen  mug. 
The  white  ones  signified  exemption,  and  the  black 

Y 


170       MODE  OF  DRAWING  THE  LOTS. 

death.  One  hundred  and  fifty-nine  white  beans 
were  placed  in  the  bottom  of  the  mug,  and  seven- 
teen black  ones  placed  upon  the  top  of  them.  The 
beans  were  not  stirred,  and  had  so  slight  a  shake 
that  it  was  perfectly  clear  they  had  not  been  mixed 
together.  Such  was  their  anxiety  to  execute  Cap- 
tain Cameron,  and  perhaps  the  balance  of  the  offi- 
cers, that  first  Cameron,  and  afterward  they,  were 
made  to  draw  a  bean  each  from  the  mug  in  this 
condition. 

The  opposite  plate,  sketched  by  Charles  M'Laugh- 
lin,  who  was  an  eyewitness,  and  so  fortunate  as  to 
draw  clear,  represents  the  gallant  Cameron  in  the 
act  of  drawing  first.  He  said,  with  his  usual  cool- 
ness, "Well,  boys,  we  have  to  draw,  let's  be  at  it ;"  so 
saying,  he  thrust  his  hand  into  the  mug,  and  drew  out 
a  white  bean.  Next  came  Colonel  Wm.  F.  Wilson, 
who  was  chained  to  him  ;  then  Captain  Wm.  Ryan, 
and  then  Judge  F.  M.  Gibson,  all  of  whom  drew 
white  beans.  Next  came  Captain  Eastland,  who 
drew  the  first  black  one,  and  then  came  the  balance 
of  the  men.  They  all  drew  their  beans  with  that 
manly  dignity  and  firmness  which  showed  them  su- 
perior to  their  condition.  Some  of  lighter  temper 
jested  over  the  bloody  tragedy.  One  would  say, 
"  Boys,  this  beats  raffling  all  to  pieces ;"  another 
would  say  that  "  this  is  the  tallest  gambling  scrape 
I  ever  was  in,"  and  such  like  remarks.  None 
showed  change  of  countenance ;  and  as  the  black 
beans  failed  to  depress,  so  did  the  white  fail  to  elate. 


ROMAN    FIRMNESS.  171 

The  knocking  off  the  irons  from  the  unfortunate 
alone  told  who  they  were.  Poor  Robert  Beard, 
who  lay  upon  the  ground  near  by  exceedingly  ill, 
and  nearly  exhausted  from  his  forced  marches  and 
sufferings,  called  his  brother  William,  who  was 
bringing  him  a  cup  of  water,  and  said,  "  Brother,  if 
you  draw  a  black  bean,  I'll  take  your  place  ;  I  want 
to  die."  The  brother,  with  overwhelming  anguish, 
said,  "  No  !  I  will  keep  my  own  place  ;  I  am  strong- 
er, and  better  able  to  die  than  you."  These  noble 
youths  both  drew  clear,  but  both  soon  after  died, 
leaving  this  last  Roman  legacy  to  their  venerable 
parents  in  Texas.  Several  of  the  Mexican  officers 
who  officiated  in  this  cruel  violation  of  their  coun- 
try's faith  expressed  great  dissatisfaction  thereat, 
and  some  wept  bitterly.  Soon  after,  the  fated  were 
placed  in  a  separate  courtyard,  where  about  dark 
they  were  executed. 

Several  of  our  men  were  permitted  to  visit  the 
unfortunate  previously  to  the  execution,  to  receive 
their  dying  requests.  Poor  Major  Cocke,  when  he 
first  drew  the  fatal  bean,  held  it  up  between  his  fore- 
finger and  thumb,  and  with  a  smile  of  contempt,  said, 
"  Boys,  I  told  you  so ;  I  never  failed  in  my  life  to 
draw  a  prize ;"  and  then  he  said  to  Judge  Gibson, 
"  Well,  judge,  say  to  my  friends  that  I  died  in 
grace."  The  judge,  much  affected  at  this  last  sad 
parting,  showed  it  from  his  tears.  The  major  re- 
plied, "  They  only  rob  me  of  forty  years,"  and  then 
sat  down  and  wrote  a  sensible  and  dignified  letter 


172    FIFTEEN  MEXICAN  SHOTS  TO  KILL  A  TEXIAN. 

of  remonstrance  to  General  Waddy  Thompson,  the 
United  States  minister  in  Mexico  •  and  knowing 
that  his  remains  would  be  robbed  of  his  clothes  af- 
ter his  death,  drew  off  his  pantaloons,  handed  them 
to  his  surviving  comrades,  and  died  in  his  under- 
clothes. 

Poor  Henry  Whaling,  one  of  Cameron's  best 
fighters,  as  he  drew  his  black  bean,  said,  with  as 
bright  a  look  as  ever  lighted  man's  countenance, 
"  Well,  they  don't  make  much  off  me,  any  how,  for 
I  know  I  have  killed  twenty-five  of  the  yellow-bel- 
lies ;"  then  demanding  his  dinner  in  a  firm  tone,  and 
saying  that  "  they  shall  not  cheat  me  out  of  it,"  he 
ate  heartily,  smoked  a  cigar,  and  in  twenty  minutes 
after  was  launched  into  eternity  !  The  Mexicans 
said  that  this  man  had  the  biggest  heart  of  any  they 
ever  saw.  They  shot  him  fifteen  times  before  he 
expired ! 

Poor  Torrey,  quite  a  youth,  but  in  spirit  a  giant, 
said  that  "  he  was  perfectly  willing  to  meet  his  fate; 
that  for  the  glory  of  his  country  he  had  fought, 
and  for  her  glory  he  was  willing  to  die ;"  and  turn- 
ing to  the  officer,  said,  "  After  the  battle  of  San  Ja- 
cinto, my  family  took  one  of  your  prisoner  youths, 
raised  and  educated  him,  and  this  is  our  requital." 

Edward  Este  spoke  of  his  fate  with  the  coolest 
indifference,  and  said  that  he  would  rather  be  shot 
than  dragged  along  in  this  manner.  Cash  said, 
"Well,  they  murdered  my  brother  with  Colonel 
Fannin,  and  they  are  about  to  murder  me." 


PATRIOTIC    FIRMNESS.  173 

J.  L.  Jones  said  to  the  interpreter,  "  Tell  the  of- 
ficer to  look  upon  men  who  are  not  afraid  to  die 
for  their  country." 

Captain  Eastland  behaved  with  the  most  patriot- 
ic dignity ;  he  desired  that  his  country  should  not 
particularly  avenge  his  death,  but  for  her  own  hon- 
our he  implored  her  never  to  lay  down  her  arms 
until  the  most  ample  reparation  and  her  uncondi- 
tional freedom  should  be  secured.  He  said,  "I 
know  that  some  have  thought  me  timid,  but,  thank 
God  !  death  has  no  terrors  for  me."  Major  Robert 
Dunham  said  "  he  was  prepared  to  die,  and  would 
to  God  that  he  had  a  chance  to  do  the  same  thing 
over  again ;  that  he  gloried  in  the  demonstration 
they  had  made,  which  showed  Texians  without 
arms  to  be  more  than  equal  to  Mexicans  with  them." 
James  Ogden,  with  his  usual  equanimity  of  temper, 
smiled  at  his  fate,  and  said,  "  I  am  prepared." 

Young  Robert  W.  Harris  behaved  in  the  most 
unflinching  manner,  and  called  upon  his  companions 
to  avenge  the  murder,  while  their  flowing  tears  and 
bursting  hearts,  invoking  heaven  for  their  witness, 
responded  to  the  call.  I  have  the  utmost  confidence 
that  this  pledge,  so  solemnly  plighted,  will  be  re- 
deemed. 

They  one  and  all  invoked  their  country  to  do 
both  them  and  herself  justice.  Captain  Cameron, 
in  taking  his  leave  of  these  brave  men,  and  partic- 
ularly of  Turnbull,  a  brother  Scotchman,  with  whom 
he  had  been  in  many  dangers,  wept  bitterly,  and  im- 


174  REFINED    CRUELTY. 

plored  the  officers  to  execute  him  and  spare  his 
men. 

Just  previous  to  the  firing  they  were  bound  to- 
gether with  cords,  and  their  eyes  being  bandaged, 
they  were  set  upon  a  log  near  the  wall,  with  their 
backs  to  their  executioners.  They  all  begged  the 
officer  to  shoot  them  in  front,  and  at  a  short  dis- 
tance ;  that  "  they  were  not  afraid  to  look  death  in 
the  face."  This  he  refused;  and,  to  make  his  cruelty 
as  refined  as  possible,  fired  at  several  paces,  and  con- 
tinued the  firing  from  ten  to  twelve  minutes,  lacer- 
ating and  mangling  these  heroes  in  a  manner  too 
horrible  for  description. 

Our  interpreter,  who  was  permitted  to  remain 
with  them  to  the  last,  says  that  "  fifteen  times  they 
wounded  that  iron-nerved  soul,  Henry  Whaling; 
and  it  would  seem  that  Providence  had  a  special 
care  in  prolonging  his  existence,  that  he  might  dem- 
onstrate to  his  enemies  the  national  character  they 
had  to  contend  with;  for  he  gritted  his  teeth  at  and 
defied  them  in  terms  of  withering  reproach,  until 
they  placed  a  gun  to  his  head  and  blew  his  brains 
against  the  wall.  Such  was  the  effect  of  this  horri- 
ble massacre  upon  their  own  soldiers,  who  were  sta- 
tioned as  a  guard  upon  the  wall  above,  that  one  of 
them  fainted,  and  came  near  falling  over,  but  was 
caught  by  his  comrades. 

During  the  martyrdom  of  these  noble  patriots,  the 
main  body  of  our  men  were  separated  from  them 
by  a  stone  wall  of  some  fifteen  feet  high,  and  heard 


THE    MEMORABLE    llTH    OF    FEBRUARY.  175 

their  last  agonized  groans  with  feelings  of  which  it 
would  be  mockery  to  attempt  the  description.  The 
next  morning,  as  they  were  marched  on  the  road  to 
Mexico,  they  passed  the  mangled  bodies  of  their 
dead  comrades,  whose  bones  now  lie  bleaching  upon 
the  plains  of  Salado,  a  perishing  remembrance  of 
exalted  patriotism,  but  a  lasting  one  of  the  infamy 
of  their  President,  Sam  Houston,  who  caused  them 
to  be  falsely  executed  as  robbers  and  marauders 
upon  Mexico. 

We  repeat  that  we  look  upon  the  11th  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1843,  with  unspeakable  national  pride  ;  and 
had  we  been  with  our  men  on  that  occasion,  I  would 
have  preferred,  and  it  would  have  been  vastly  more 
to  the  honour  of  myself  and  country,  to  have  per- 
ished in  that  attempt  to  regain  our  liberty,  than  to 
have  tamely  submitted  to  such  slavery.  Those  who 
have  denounced  it  as  a  "piece  of  moon-struck  mad- 
ness," perhaps  in  their  judgments  they  are  sus- 
tained by  the  uninformed,  on  account  of  our  men 
departing  from  the  original  plan  of  keeping  the  main 
road  home.  The  calculation  both  of  success  in 
battle  and  the  reasonableness  of  reaching  home 
were  maturely  made  ;  and  we  repeat,  without  the 
fear  of  contradiction,  that,  had  that  plan  of  opera- 
tion been  pursued  by  keeping  the  main  road,  on  the 
19th,  which  was  nine  days  after  their  victory  at 
Salado,  our  men  would  have  been  safe  in  Texas. 
We  knew  the  fact  from  Captain  Fitzgerald  and 
Messrs.  Van  Ness  and  Hancock,  that  all  their  reg- 


176  WHAT    TEXIANS    CAN    DO. 

ular  forces  at  San  Fernando  had  been  marched  down 
to  Guerrero,  and  that  before  said  forces  could  be  in- 
formed from  Salado,  and  then  marched  back  to  out- 
crossing above  the  Precidio  of  the  Rio  Grande,  our 
men  would  be  far  in  Texas.  We  also  knew  the 
fact  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  get  any  sufficient 
citizen  force  to  attack  them.  These  calculations 
were  fully  justified  from  the  result  that,  1st.  Nine 
days  after  the  battle,  both  Governor  Mexier  and  Or- 
tega had  only  four  hundred  and  twenty  men  to  inter- 
cept them,  a  force  which,  had  our  men  kept  togeth- 
er in  the  road,  would  never  have  approached  them. 

2dly.  That  on  this  road,  and  in  sight  of  the  city 
of  Saltillo,  Colonel  Jordan,  three  years  since,  with 
one  hundred  and  fourteen  men,  only  ninety-three 
of  whom  were  effective,  fought  General  Vascus  and 
one  thousand  five  hundred  troops,  defeated  him,  and 
made  good  his  retreat,  in  the  face  of  this  pursuing 
force,  into  Texas,  with  a  loss  of  eight  men. 

3dly.  That  only  two  years  since  one  hundred 
and  fifty  miserable  Comanche  Indians  put  the  town 
of  Saltillo  under  tribute,  and  were  supplied  with 
every  requisition. 

With  these  facts  before  us,  will  any  except  the 
"  moon-struck"  pretend  to  say  that  our  two  hundred 
and  twenty-one  men  at  Salado,  who  had  performed 
such  wonderful  deeds  of  valour,  could  not  do  half 
what  Jordan  and  his  ninety-three  did,  or  could  not 
do  what  a  few  wretched  Comanches  had  frequently 
done  1 


TRIBUTE    TO    CAPTAIN    FITZGERALD.  177 

We  return  again  to  the  battle  of  Salado,  to  in- 
quire after  our  wounded  and  those  who  remained 
with  them.  Of  the  wounded,  Higgerson  died  soon 
after  our  main  body  had  taken  the  road  home.  Cap- 
tains Fitzgerald  and  Baker,  and  privates  Stansbury 
and  Hancock,  were  placed  in  a  rough  cart  and 
started  to  Mexico,  with  Captain  Reese  and  those 
wrho  were  not  wounded,  but  who  refused  to  return 
home  with  the  balance  of  the  men.  Fitzgerald  died 
the  second  day,  and  was  hauled  from  the  cart  be- 
fore the  vital  spark  had  left  his  body,  and  thrown 
upon  the  prairie  to  the  wolves  and  vultures. 

We  rarely  knew  so  brave  a  man  and  so  good  a 
soldier  as  was  Captain  F.,  an  Irishman  by  birth. 
He  had  served  as  captain  in  the  "  Peninsular  War" 
under  General  Evans,  where  he  had  distinguished 
himself,  and  came  to  Texas,  as  he  informed  the 
writer,  "because  ours  was  the  most  just  cause  in 
which  he  could  engage."  He  deserves  the  sympa- 
thy of  all  brave  men,  and  the  lasting  gratitude  of  our 
country.  The  balance  of  this  party,  in  all  sixteen, 
were,  under  charge  of  Colonel  Ortis,  carried  to  San 
Luis  Potosi,  which  place  they  reached  the  26th  of 
February,  where  they  overtook  our  party,  which 
had  been  detained  here  several  days. 

Captain  Reese  and  his  party  have  been  severely 
censured  by  many  of  his  comrades  for  not  joining 
them  in  their  attempt  to  reach  home,  and  some 
have  ascribed  the  worst  of  motives  for  his  not  so 
doing.     Captain  R.  is  too  tried  a  soldier  and  devo- 

Z 


178      CHARACTER  OF  CAPTAIN  REESE. 

ted  a  patriot  to  allow  a  suspicion  either  of  want  of 
bravery  or  patriotism.  It  has  been  his  good  fortune, 
with  his  late  brother,  who  fell  fighting  for  Texas, 
to  have  been  in  every  battle  from  the  taking  of  San 
Antonio  in  1835,  in  all  of  which  they  were  dis- 
tinguished for  their  bravery.  The  writer  has  been 
with  him  in  several  trying  situations,  and  few  men, 
on  all  occasions,  have  evidenced  such  cool  bravery. 
Had  he  never  given  any  other  evidence  than  in  his 
scaling  the  walls  of  Perote,  and  successfully  making 
his  way  through  an  enemy's  country  many  hundred 
miles,  it  would  have  been  sufficient  to  have  stamp- 
ed him  as  a  man  of  uncommon  fortitude  and  daring. 
Captain  Reese  was  opposed  to  the  assault  at  Sala- 
do,  because,  as  he  says,  he  honestly  doubted  the 
success  of  the  men  in  reaching  their  homes.  But 
while  the  assault  was  going  on,  he  exposed  himself 
as  much  as  any  one  in  causing  the  Mexicans  to  give 
up  their  arms  ;  and  after  our  men  were  victorious, 
he  determined  to  share  their  fate,  provided  he  could 
get  his  younger  brother  William,  who  was  quite  a 
lad,  to  remain.  William  resolved  he  would  follow 
him,  and  this  determined  the  captain  to  remain ;  to 
which  he  yielded  more  on  his  account  and  that  of 
his  parents,  who  looked  to  him  to  take  care  of  the 
youth,  than  his  own. 

Our  party,  under  charge  of  Captain  Romano, 
proceeded  from  Mataguala  on  the  San  Luis  Potosi 
road,  and  on  the  17th  of  February  reached  the  ha- 
cienda of  Count  Zivyes.     This  gentleman  has  a 


EXTENSIVE   STOCK  ESTATE.  179 

large  estate,  lives  in  superior  style,  and  treated  us 
with  the  most  bountiful  hospitality.  Instead  of 
eating  our  humble  fare  of  tortillas  and  frijoles,  we 
were  invited  night  and  morning  to  his  mansion,  and 
had  a  dozen  covers  for  our  meals.  This  unsolicit- 
ed, unexpected  hospitality,  to  use  a  Texas  expres- 
sion, "looked  so  much  like  the  white  settlements" 
that  it  warmly  attached  this  excellent  gentleman  to 
us.  He  took  great  pains  in  showing  us  through  his 
extensive  buildings,  and  all  the  appurtenances  be- 
longing to  the  establishment,  particularly  his  farm- 
ing utensils,  which  we  found  to  be  exceedingly 
crude,  at  least  one  hundred  years  behind  Texas  in 
this  respect.  He  was  a  gentleman  of  liberal  educa- 
tion, but  educated  in  Spain,  the  wrong  place  to 
make  a  good  farmer.  He  seemed  sensible  of  this, 
and  showed  us  several  English  works  upon  agricul- 
ture. Stock  is  the  principal  produce  of  this  large 
estate  of  forty-five  leagues.  He  showed  us  a  large 
number  of  horses  and  mules,  and  some  of  the  best 
native  horses  we  saw  in  Mexico.  He  appears  very 
anxious  to  improve  them  by  fine  American  breeds, 
and  seemed  astonished  at  our  knowledge  of  blood- 
ed pedigree.  Upon  inquiring  as  to  the  extent  of 
his  stock,  he  remarked  that  "there  were  many  lar- 
ger stock  estates  in  Mexico;  that  he  had  twenty- 
seven  hundred  brood  mares,  which  required  sixty- 
eight  stallions,  and  about  fifty  jacks  to  serve,  as 
they  did  not  allow  more  than  twenty-five  to  each  ; 
ten  thousand  black  cattle,  and  forty  thousand  sheep. 


180  MARCH    FOR    SAN    LUIS    POTOSI. 

Stock  of  all  kinds  are  very  cheap  in  Mexico,  and  we 
fear  we  lost  credit  with  the  count  by  telling  him 
the  immense  high  prices  at  which  our  best  bloods 
sold  for  in  the  United  States ;  but  perhaps  we  are 
in  more  danger  now,  by  telling  of  his  immense  num- 
bers. We  parted  reluctantly  from  the  count,  after 
extorting  a  promise  from  him  to  visit  our  country 
as  soon  as  the  war  should  end,  and  he  desiring  us 
to  call  freely  upon  him  for  every  necessary  in  Mex- 
ico. 

February  18th.  Marched  for  San  Luis  Potosi,  a 
distance  of  thirty  leagues,  which  place  we  reached 
on  the  20th;  kept  standing  in  the  street,  opposite 
the  governor's  quarters,  in  the  hot  sun,  without  per- 
mission to  dismount,  about  twenty  minutes,  when 
we  were  marched  off  to  a  room  in  the  hospital  bar- 
racks. Being  exceedingly  fatigued,  the  sun  having 
been  excessively  hot,  and  the  dust  in  the  road  al- 
most suffocating,  we  had  procured  a  flask  of  vino 
mascot,  when  a  corporal  stepped  up,  and,  in  the 
most  contemptuous  manner,  took  it  from  us :  this 
privilege  had  never  before  been  denied  us.  In  a 
few  minutes  we  heard  Colonel  Terris  order  a  senti- 
nel to  lock  us  up :  this  was  done  with  as  little  cere- 
mony as  the  taking  away  of  our  flask.  Upon  our 
remonstrance,  the  governor  had  our  door  unlocked, 
and  promised  a  reprimand  to  the  old  brute.  We 
remained  in  this  city  eight  days,  in  which  time  the 
following  correspondence  was  held  with  the  gov- 
ernor : 


LETTER  TO  THE  GOVERNOR.         181 

"  Prison,  San  Luis  Potosi,  ) 
February  22d,  1843.      i 

"  To  his  Excellency  the  Commander-in-chief ) 
of  the  Department  of  San  Luis  Potosi :      $ 

«  Sir, — The  letter  addressed  to  your  excellency 
on  the  19th  instant  by  General  Fisher  being  unan- 
swered, and  no  farther  notice  taken  thereof,  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  undersigned,  than  a  verbal  inquiry 
through  an  officer  to  know  what  was  desired,  makes 
it  necessary  that  we  should  most  reluctantly  trouble 
you  with  another  communication.  We  have  a  suf- 
ficient knowledge  of  the  world  to  know  how  diffi- 
cult is  the  approach  to  power  in  different  countries; 
and  in  laying  our  complaints  before  your  excellency 
from  this  uncomfortable  prison,  we  make  much  al- 
lowance that  the  truth  will  always  reach  you,  sur- 
rounded as  you  are  by  such  a  succession  of  offi- 
cials. 

"  We  should  be  recreant  in  duty  to  ourselves  and 
to  our  own  country,  as  well  as  to  those  illustrious  gov- 
ernments which  have  formally  acknowledged  the  na- 
tionality of  Texas  and  the  whole  civilized  world,  to 
permit  in  silence  a  violation,  in  our  own  persons,  of 
those  wholesome  laws  which  have  been  adopted  for 
ages  throughout  all  Christendom.  And  we  most  re- 
spectfully protest  that  being  your  prisoners  of  war, 
and  incarcerated  with  all  the  indignity  of  state  crim- 
inals, can  in  the  least  possible  degree  derogate  from 
the  character  in  which  we  capitulated,  which  we 
occupy  in  our  country,  and  which  the  exalted  gov- 
ernments of  Great  Britain,  France,  Belgium,  and 


182         LETTER  TO  THE  GOVERNOR. 

the  United  States  recognise.  At  the  same  time,  we 
do  not  pretend  to  assert  that  the  violation  of  those 
laws  are  by  order  of  your  excellency;  yet  it  is  due 
that  you  should  be  correctly  informed  thereof,  and 
we  have  the  utmost  confidence  that  such  is  not  the 
desire  of  the  illustrious  men  at  the  head  of  your 
government. 

"  Upon  our  arrival  in  your  city,  after  a  fatiguing 
ride  of  ten  leagues  beneath  a  hot  sun,  we  were  lock- 
ed up  in  this  prison,  with  the  bare  walls  for  furni- 
ture. We  were  about  to  refresh  ourselves  with  a 
glass  of  "  vino  mascal,"  and  even  that  was  denied 
us.  Some  short  time  after  we  were  favoured  with 
the  light  of  heaven,  and  permitted  the  use  of  spir- 
its,- for  which  was  substituted  quadruple  guards 
within  these  high  walls  and  without,  so  that  we 
cannot,  without  intrusion,  go  one  step  to  perform 
even  the  common  offices  of  nature.  Without  a 
chair  or  bed  to  sit  or  lie  upon,  our  apartment  is 
made  a  guardroom,  which  bayoneted  sentinels 
pace  during  the  whole  night,  uttering  every  few 
minutes  the  most  unearthly  exclamations,  as  if  the 
luxury  of  the  brick  pavement  was  too  good  a  bed 
for  us :  these,  with  the  "  magnanimous"  allowance 
of  fifty  cents  per  day  for  our  support,  is  the  situa- 
tion in  which  we  are  at  present. 

"  We  protest  that  this  treatment  is  wholly  incon- 
sistent with  the  magnanimity  of  any  civilized  na- 
tion under  the  sun,  aud  we  cannot  believe  it  has  the 
sanction  of  one  occupying  the  exalted  station  of 


LETTER  TO  THE  GOVERNOR.         183 

your  excellency.  Were  such  our  belief,  what  a 
commentary  would  it  be  upon  your  high  official 
station,  that  indignity,  insult,  and  injury  are  heaped 
upon  us  because  we  had  bravely  done  our  duty  to 
our  country ! 

"  We  farther  protest  that  it  is  not  in  the  history 
of  the  English  people,  nor  their  descendants,  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  of  whom  we  proudly 
acknowledge  ourselves,  that  the  honour  of  a  gen- 
eral officer  has  been  violated  by  breach  of  parole : 
and  if  your  excellency  rightly  understands  this  na- 
tional character,  you  will  acknowledge  this  honour 
is  more  binding  than  the  criminal's  chains.  We 
therefore  most  respectfully  look  to  your  excellency 
for  an  extension  of  those  rights  which  not  only  our 
articles  of  capitulation,  but  the  laws  of  civilized 
warfare,  guaranty  to  us.  In  conclusion,  we  beg 
leave  to  inform  your  excellency,  that  when  we  left 
Matamoras  it  was  under  a  positive  promise  from 
General  Ampudia,  to  whom  we  capitulated,  that  we 
should  be  sent  with  all  possible  despatch,  in  advance 
of  the  other  prisoners,  to  your  capital.  We  doubt 
not,  when  your  excellency  is  informed  of  a  promise 
made  with  the  representative  of  the  Mexican  gov- 
ernment, you  will  take  the  earliest  means  of  carry- 
ing it  out. 

"  With  considerations  of  high  regard,  we  sub- 
scribe ourselves  your  excellency's  obedient  ser- 
vants." 


184  LETTER    TO    CAPTAIN    ROMANO. 

After  we  sent  the  above  letter  to  the  governor,  we 
experienced  much  better  treatment  from  our  guards. 

Before  leaving  the  city,  Captain  Romano  called 
to  bid  us  adieu,  and  as  a  testimonial  of  his  good 
conduct  and  kind  treatment  to  us,  we  addressed  him 
the  following  note : 

"  San  Luis  Potosi,  February  20th,  1843. 
"  To  Captain  Herman  Romano,  Mexican  Army : 

"  Sir, — Before  separating  with  you,  permit  us  to 
tender  our  warmest  and  heartfelt  acknowledgments 
for  the  many  courtesies  you  have  extended  towards 
us  as  prisoners  of  war  since  we  have  been  under 
your  charge. 

It  is  a  prominent  part  of  the  constitution  of  the 
brave  to  feel  for  the  misfortunes  of  the  brave :  this 
feeling  has  marked  you  out,  in  our  estimation,  as 
eminently  entitled  to  your  government's  confidence; 
for,  at  the  same  time  that  you  have  been  kind  and 
generous  to  us,  you  have  performed  your  duty  with 
firmness  and  dignity  towards  her.  The  coward  has 
no  feelings  in  common  with  the  brave:  their  senti- 
ments can  never  assimilate  ;  they  are  essentially 
different;  the  one  glories  in  generosity  to  a  fallen 
foe,  while  the  other  delights  in  a  tyrannical  author- 
ity when  placed  beyond  accountability. 

"  That  you  may  meet  with  that  honourable  pro- 
motion which  you  deserve,  and  a  safe  return  to  your 
family  and  friends,  is  the  sincere  desires  of  your  obe- 
dient humble  servants." 

While  in  this  city  we  had  been  several  days  un- 


LETTER  TO  CAPTAIN  REYES.         185 

der  the  immediate  charge  of  Captain  Reyes,  an  old 
veteran,  who,  above  thirty  years  previous,  fought  un- 
der Hidalgo,  and  from  him  we  received  also  kind 
treatment,  which  we  acknowledged  in  the  following 
note  : 

"  San  Luis  Potosi,  February  28th,  1843. 
"  To  Captain  Jose  Marie  Reyes,  Mexican  Army. 

"  Sir, — Before  leaving  your  city,  permit  us  to  ten- 
der you  our  warmest  thanks  for  the  kind  and  humane 
treatment  we  have  received  at  your  hands  while 
prisoners  of  war  under  your  immediate  charge. 

"  One  of  your  long  experience,  who  has  grown 
gray  in  the  most  honourable  and  chivalrous  of  all 
professions,  can  rightly  estimate  the  feelings  of  a 
brother-soldier  when  his  fortunes  are  reversed  by  the 
chances  of  war.  Of  this  you  have  given  us  the 
most  honourable  proof,  by  which  you  have  made  us 
your  debtors,  and  secured  our  lasting  gratitude. 
Please  accept  our  fervent  and  best  wishes  for  your 
continued  health  and  prosperity.  Very  respectfully 
your  obedient  servants." 

The  city  of  San  Luis  Potosi  is  a  large  and  beau- 
tiful place,  and  the  capital  of  the  state  of  that  name. 
Its  population  has  greatly  decreased  since  the  com- 
mencement of  the  revolution  in  1809.  It  is  situated 
in  an  extensive  plain,  surrounded  by  high  mountains, 
and  the  cultivation  carried  on,  and  the  cattle  water- 
ed from  numerous  wells  worked  by  mules.  These 
wells  are  usually  deep,  and  dug  in  the  form  of  a  par- 

Aa 


186  MODE    OF    RAISING    WATER    IN    POTOSI. 

allelogram  ;  the  mode  of  raising  the  water  has  been 
greatly  improved  since  the  Honourable  Joel  R.  Poin- 
sett travelled  through  this  country  in  1822.  It  is, 
however,  exceedingly  simple,  and  might  be  used  with 
great  advantage  in  many  portions  of  the  United 
States.  A  mule,  blindfolded  (for  almost  everything 
is  hoodwinked  in  that  country),  is  hitched  to  a  shaft 
which  turns  a  perpendicular  spindle,  to  which  is  at- 
tached a  crude  vertical  cog  wheel,  working  a  drum 
over  which  a  leather  band  is  passed,  and  upon  which 
is  attached  small  buckets,  one  foot  apart,  upon  the 
plan  of  elevators  in  a  flour  mill.  This  band  extends 
to  the  water,  be  the  well  deep  or  shallow.  The  wa- 
ter is  consequently  passed  over  the  drum,  and  falls 
into  a  trough,  which  conducts  it  to  an  extensive  res- 
ervoir, from  which  the  cattle  and  farm  are  supplied. 
The  hoodwinked  animal  works  his  day  without  a 
driver,  and  is  then  turned  upon  the  common  to  recu- 
perate, while  a  fresh  one  is  hitched  in  his  place,  and 
thus  a  perpetual  stream  of  water  is  poured  forth  from 
these  numerous  wells. 


HACIENDA    DE    PLATA.  187 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

MARCH  TO  THE  CAPITAL  UNDER  COLONEL  TERRIS. 

Hacienda  de  Plata. — Bad  Treatment. — Xaral,  Marquis  of. — Horses  ta- 
ken from  us. — Made  to  walk  over  the  Mountain. — Our  Remonstrances 
with  the  Colonel. — Billy  Reese  and  the  Catholic  Crosses. — Bugler,  his 
Wife,  and  Sister.— Suffer  for  Water. — Punishment  of  a  Soldier. — Do- 
lores.— Hidalgo.— Calleja. — San  Miguel  el  Grande. — Hacienda  of  the 
Jesuits. — Burned  Hacienda. — Lodged  in  a  Stable.— The  Comet. — Su- 
perstition concerning  it. — Mexicans  meet  Danger  with  a  Prayer. — 
Cruel  Treatment. — Mexican  Officers. — Lasso. — Lice. — Fleas  :  Advan- 
tage of. — Locked  up. — Protest. — Quartered  in  a  Corral. — Villanous 
Conduct  of  the  Colonel. — Valley  of  Mexico. — Arrival  at  Tacubaya. — 
Description  of. — General  Jackson's  Birthday. — Friends  visit  us. — Mr. 
Cursin. — Captain  West. — Mr.  Packenham :  Interview  with. 

March  1st.  Placed  under  charge  of  Colonel  Ter- 
ris,  of  the  fourth  regiment  of  infantry,  and  started  for 
Mexico,  in  company  with  Captain  Reese  and  his 
party  of  sixteen,  who  had  arrived  in  San  Luis  Potosi 
a  few  days  after  us.  To-day  marched  five  leagues 
to  a  hacienda  de  Plata,  a  silver  estate,  which  had  pre- 
viously been  worked  with  much  profit,  but  now,  like 
a  majority  of  the  mines  of  Mexico,  in  disuse  for  the 
purposes  of  making  silver.  "  Rich  as  the  mines  of 
Potosi"  has  long  been  a  proverb ;  but  if  the  proverb 
were  now  reversed,  it  would  be  more  appropriate. 

March  2d.  Marched  nine  leagues  to  a  hacienda, 
where  we  were  halted  about  two  hours,  and  kept 
standing  in  front  of  the  buildings  in  the  open  road, 
and  in  the  most  intensely-burning  sun,  while  the  sol- 
diers of  the  regiment  had  taken  advantage  of  a  few 


188   HACIENDA  OF  THE  MARQUIS  DE  XARAL. 

feet  of  shade  upon  the  north  side  of  a  wall  to  repose 
for  the  time.  As  was  customary  with  the  savage  old 
officer  in  command,  he  had  sent  his  servant  ahead 
and  prepared  dinner  for  himself  and  other  officers, 
which  they  were  enjoying  within  the  cool  and  ample 
apartments  of  the  building ;  after  which  they  retired 
to  their  siesta,  not  only  regardless  of  our  comfort,  but 
perfectly  indifferent  whether  we  ate  or  not.  We 
gave  the  corporal  of  our  guard  money  to  purchase 
for  us  something  to  eat ;  after  much  delay,  he  brought 
a  few  eggs  and  frijoles  (beans),  not  more  for  our 
eighteen  companions  than  two  could  have  eaten. 
After  about  two  hours  the  officers  made  their  appear- 
ance, refreshed  from  their  siesta,  and  marched  us  five 
leagues  farther  to  the  hacienda  Xaral,  a  large  place 
containing  about  nine  thousand  souls,  and  one  of 
many  other,  though  smaller,  haciendas  belonging  to 
the  old  Marquis  de  Xaral,  who  resided  at  this  place. 
Here  we  were  quartered  in  an  unfurnished  room  in 
the  meson  (inn),  and  had  the  great  satisfaction  of 
buying  with  our  own  money  enough  to  eat,  which 
always  came  to  us  at  two  or  three  prices  over  and 
above  what  the  Mexicans  would  pay  for  it;  for  fre- 
quently the  officer  of  the  guard,  and  always  the  or- 
derly appointed  to  do  our  purchasing,  had  his  profits 
to  make. 

As  we  expected,  we  did  not  see  the  excellent  old 
marquis ;  for  some  of  our  companions,  who  the  year 
previous  had  been  with  the  Santa  Fe  prisoners,  were 
most  grateful  for  his  benevolence  to  them  on  that  oc- 


EXTENSIVE    POSSESSIONS    OF    THE    MARQUIS.    189 

casion,  as  he  has  since  been  to  the  main  body  of  our 
Mier  men  when  passing  his  residence.  Two  of  his 
sons,  with  many  other  citizens,  came  to  our  quarters 
and  looked  into  our  prison-room  at  us,  with  about 
the  same  amount  of  curiosity  that  people  ordinarily 
look  into  a  cage  of  monkeys  or  lions,  with  possi- 
bly this  difference  in  their  moral  reflections :  that  it 
was  strange  that  such  heretics  as  we,  so  very  igno- 
rant of  the  Holy  Virgin  and  the  saints,  should  be 
braver  and  more  skilled  in  war  than  they.  With 
their  supreme  ignorance  in  most  things,  I  have  never 
yet  seen  a  Mexican  officer  or  soldier  so  ignorant  as 
to  doubt  that  superiority;  and  the  very  many  with 
whom  I  have  conversed  think  it  no  disparagement 
to  their  arms  when  we  allow  that  they  may  possibly 
fight  us  five  to  our  one. 

The  marquis  has  very  extensive  estates.  We 
were  told  that  he  owned  some  twenty  odd  haciendas. 
We  travelled  several  days  upon  his  possessions.  The 
principal  income  of  his  estates  is  in  the  sale  of  live- 
stock. At  the  hacienda  Xaral  we  were  informed 
that  he  butchered  ninety  thousand  wethers  per  an- 
num. The  slaughter-house  was  pointed  out  to  us : 
an  extensive  establishment,  with  kettles  arranged 
something  after  the  plan  of  sugar-boilers,  into  which, 
after  the  sheep  are  butchered,  and  chopped  up  bone 
and  flesh  together,  they  are  placed,  and  the  tallow 
extracted.  Both  the  tallow  and  the  residuum  form 
extensive  articles  of  commerce :  the  former  for  can- 
dles and  for  other  purposes,  and  the  latter,  being 


190  HORSES    TAKEN    FROM    US. 

ready  cooked,  is  generally  kept  for  sale  in  the  shops 
as  an  article  of  food,  and  much  use  made  of  it  by  the 
soldiery,  it  being  always  ready  to  be  eaten. 

The  pavement  in  our  prison-room  being  smooth, 
we  slept  soundly  until  awakened  by  the  bugles  at  four 
o'clock.  We  were  now  informed  that  if  wre  wished 
to  ride  any  farther  on  our  journey,  we  could  have  the 
privilege  of  hiring  our  own  mules  or  burros.  Up  to 
this  time  we  had  been  furnished  horses,  both  by  or- 
der of  General  Ampudia,  and  Governor  Ortega  of 
New  Leon,  and  such  was  the  order  of  the  governor 
of  San  Luis  Potosi,  who  had  two  days  previous  fur- 
nished us  with  the  horses  we  rode  to  this  place.  We 
remonstrated  with  Colonel  Terris  against  this  act  as 
violative  of  our  articles  of  capitulation  and  the  reit- 
erated promises  of  General  Ampudia,  but  to  little  ef- 
fect. Our  rations  had  been  reduced  by  him  from 
fifty  to  twenty-five  cents  per  day,  which,  under  the 
rascally  imposition  of  our  officers  and  orderlies,  would 
not  have  been  sufficient  to  sustain  life,  had  it  not  been 
for  our  excellent  friends  in  Matamoras  insisting  upon 
our  taking  some  money  to  meet  such  emergencies. 

We  determined  not  to  submit  quietly  to  any  im- 
position from  the  commandant,  and  told  him  that  we 
would  represent  his  conduct  to  his  master  at  the  cap- 
ital ;  and  after  procuring  a  mule,  upon  which  our 
blankets  and  sheepskins  were  packed,  we  were 
marched  out  on  foot  with  a  file  of  bayoneted  guards 
upon  each  hand,  under  the  repeated  cry  of  officer, 
sergeants,  and  corporals,  of  " dos-a-dos"  two  and  two. 


MADE    TO    WALK    OVER    THE    MOUNTAIN.        191 

March  3d.  Our  road  to-day  lay  in  a  southern  di- 
rection, up  the  valley  in  which  Xaral  is  situated,  and 
five  leagues  brought  us  to  a  parallel  chain  of  the  Sierra 
Madre,  the  mother  mountain,  under  the  never-ceasing 
cry  of  "  delante,"  forward,  of  our  guards.  It  was  the 
first  day  that  we  were  compelled  to  march  on  foot — 
the  first  day  on  foot  is  always  the  most  tiresome — 
and,  having  been  hurried  at  a  rapid  gait  to  the  foot 
of  the  mountain,  the  abrupt  ascent  of  which  for  sev- 
eral leagues  made  us  all  wish  for  asses.  To  at- 
tempt to  describe  how  tired  one  may  be  when  bro- 
ken down,  but  still  forced  on  with  the  "  sharp  sticks" 
as  our  boys  familiarly  called  the  bayonets,  at  our 
backs,  would  be  unintelligible  to  all  except  those  who 
have  experienced  it.  To  be  ordinarily  broke  down 
is  bad  enough,  but  to  be  broke  down  going  up  a 
steep  mountain,  too  rough  for  any  animals  except 
mules  or  goats  to  travel,  is  the  worst  kind  of  fatigue  : 
you  experience  a  total  giving  way  of  the  muscles  of 
your  thighs,  and,  however  willing  you  may  be  to  pro- 
ceed$  your  legs  will  not  respond.  The  greatest  con- 
solation we  found  in  this  fix  was  to  gnash  our  teeth, 
and  hope  to  see  the  day  when  we  could  balance  this 
account. 

Having  proceeded  several  miles  up  the  mountain 
side,  I  procured  from  one  of  the  followers  of  the 
army  the  use  of  a  mule  to  help  me  on.  I  rode  but 
a  few  hundred  yards,  when  I  overtook  my  young 
friend  Billy  Reese,  who  begged  me,  "  for  God's  sake, 
to  let  him  ride  some."     I  promised  him  that  at  such 


192  BILLY    REESE    AND    THE    CROSSES. 

a  pile  of  stones  a  short  distance  above  he  might  take 
the  mule.  Upon  reaching  this  place  he  blazed  away 
with  his  walking  cane,  and  knocking  the  Catholic 
cross  from  the  pile,  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  Now, 
general,  I  feel  a  little  better;  I  think  I  can  go  another 
league;"  so  saying,  our  boys  raised  a  shout,  and  pulled 
on  up  the  mountain. 

This  very  broken  and  stony  mountain  pass  has 
been,  from  the  first  settlement  of  the  country,  more 
or  less  infested  with  robbers,  and  wherever  they 
have  murdered  a  traveller,  on  the  spot  is  raised  a 
cross,  which  the  ignorant  Catholic  erects,  not  as  the 
memento  mori  of  our  nation,  but  they  believe  it  to  be 
the  key  to  heaven.  Every  good  Catholic  after,  in 
passing  the  place,  will  cross  himself  in  prayer,  and 
throw  upon  the  spot  a  pebble  the  size  of  a  partridge 
egg,  or  larger,  according  to  convenience.  In  pro- 
portion to  the  number  killed  upon  the  spot,  or  the 
character  of  the  individual,  and  the  time  when  mur- 
dered, so  is  the  size  of  the  pile.  If  the  murdered 
was  of  high  character  or  esteemed  goodness,  the 
greater  the  interest  felt  in  redeeming  him  from  pur- 
gatory, and,  consequently,  his  pile  is  larger  than  that 
of  the  humble  Peon.  In  this  pass,  at  every  few  steps 
for  several  miles,  the  traveller  will  notice  these  pyra- 
mids of  pebbles,  from  the  size  of  a  barrel  to  ten  feet 
high,  terminating  in  a  cone,  with  a  corresponding  sized 
cross  in  the  centre.  Several  of  these  crosses  felt  the 
weight  of  Billy's  staff,  to  the  unutterable  horror  of  our 
black  guards  of  the  "  true  faith." 


BOY-SOLDIERS    BETTER    THAN    MEN.  193 

Young  Billy  Reese  had  more  cause  of  complaint 
than  most  of  us.  He  was  one  of  the  four  small 
boys  whom  General  Ampudia  released  from  prison 
at  Mier,  and  whom  he  promised  to  send  home  from 
Matamoras  ;  but,  when  reminded  of  his  promise,  he 
said,  "  If  I  send  you  home  now,  you  will  be  back 
upon  the  Rio  Grande  in  three  weeks,  fighting  us 
again  :"  so  young  Reese  was  sent  on  to  the  capital, 
where,  through  the  influence  of  the  United  States 
minister,  General  Thompson,  he  was  released.  Bil- 
ly was  the  largest  of  the  four  boys,  and  the  downy 
evidences  upon  his  upper  lip,  resembling  a  young 
frost,  bespoke  the  confidence  of  sixteen.  If  our 
friend  had  less  reverence  for  the  mummeries  of  the 
"  true  faith,"  his  Hotspur  qualities  made  him  the  bet- 
ter soldier.  This  leads  me  to  remark  here,  what  my 
experience  has  long  since  taught  me,  that  I  would  far 
prefer  an  army  of  boys  to  an  army  of  men  :  the  go- 
ahead  qualities  of  the  former  will  hardly  fail  to  win, 
while  the  more  calculating  character  of  the  latter 
make  their  movements  too  slow.  Had  our  two  hun- 
dred and  sixty-one  men  at  Mier  been  boys,  I  do  not 
entertain  a  doubt  but  that  I  should  have  been  spared 
the  pain  of  recording  their  captivity,  sufferings,  and 
deaths. 

Having  ascended  the  mountain,  we  were  marched 
several  leagues  upon  the  level  table-land,  extensively 
cultivated,  and  at  the  end  of  nine  leagues  we  stop- 
ped for  the  night,  and  were  crammed  into  a  small, 
filthy  room  of  an  extensive  hacienda,  with  several 

Bb 


194     FEMALE  FORTITUDE  AND  DEVOTION. 

of  their  own  miserable  Peons,  who  were  marched  in 
our  ranks  and  under  the  same  guards,  to  be  made 
soldiers. 

One  of  these  prisoner  Peons  was  a  bugler,  and 
consequently,  a  prize  of  no  ordinary  value  in  the  es- 
timation of  the  Mexican  commander ;  for  the  Mex 
icans,  of  all  people,  pride  themselves  most  upon  the 
empty  show  and  pomp  of  the  camp.  In  this  skele- 
ton of  a  regiment  of  less  than  three  hundred  men, 
there  were  more  musicians  than  belong  to  a  division 
in  the  United  States  army.  On  one  occasion  the 
Mexican  officers  asked  us  where  our  musicians  were. 
We  answered,  "  We  are  all  musicians  in  Texas  !" 
"  Upon  what  instruments  do  you  perform  V '  "  Upon 
the  rifle,"  we  answered,  when,  suddenly,  the  muscles 
of  their  faces  would  elongate  from  the  pleasant  to 
the  most  inexpressible  blank.  On  this  and  similar 
occasions,  when  we  would  quiz  them — and  we  let 
no  opportunity  pass  for  so  doing — they  would  al- 
ways come  to  the  conclusion  that  "  we  were  a 
strange  people." 

In  the  wife  and  sister  of  this  bugler  prisoner  we 
witnessed  instances  of  female  fortitude  and  devotion, 
which,  if  we  were  not  to  notice,  we  should  be  unjust 
to  the  purpose  of  these  pages.  This  poor  man, 
who  had  been  kidnapped  because  he  knew  how  to 
blow  a  horn,  was  kept  in  the  strictest  confinement. 
His  wife  and  sister  abandoned  their  homes,  and  fol- 
lowed the  regiment  on  foot  several  hundred  miles, 
packing  water  and  provisions  for  him,  and  attending 


SUFFER    FOR    WANT    OF    WATER.  195 

to  his  wants  with  a  devotion  I  never  saw  surpassed. 
The  sister,  whenever  the  regiment  would  halt,  occu- 
pied herself  in  making  small  paper  segars,  "  cigar- 
ritos,"  which  she  sold  both  to  our  comrades  and  the 
soldiers,  while  the  wife  would  buy  gourds  full  of 
"  vino  masca!"  and  retail  to  us  by  the  drink.  The 
profit  of  their  trades  gave  them  the  means  of  sup- 
plying the  wants  of  the  husband  and  brother.  The 
conduct  of  these  women,  so  pure,  so  unshaken  in 
the  interest  of  this  unfortunate  man,  caused  me  to 
remark,  what  I  have  often  before  observed,  both  in 
Mexico  and  other  parts  of  the  world,  how  far  supe- 
rior, in  the  cultivation  of  the  charities  of  life,  does 
the  female  appear  over  the  male  portion  of  mankind. 

The  small,  dirty  room  we  had  been  forced  into, 
with  their  own  filthy  prisoners,  was  barely  large 
enough  for  our  own  party  to  lay  down,  and  it  open- 
ed into  an  inner  court  of  the  building,  which  was 
occupied  by  the  regiment,  into  which  we  could 
not  pass  for  the  sentinel  at  our  door.  Here  we 
were  kept  three  hours  without  water,  when  it  was 
but  a  short  distance  from  us.  The  heat  and  dust 
almost  suffocating  us,  added  to  our  fatigue  in  be- 
ing forced  over  the  mountains  at  a  rapid  gait,  made 
our  thirst  intolerable.  The  soldiers  of  the  regiment 
had  plenty  of  water  near  us,  while  we  had  to  suffer 
all  the  tortures  of  the  extremest  want  of  it,  until  the 
Mexican  officers  had  luxuriated  in  their  national  ef- 
feminacy, the  siesta. 

At  length  the  lieutenant-colonel,  whose  name  I 


196  PUNISHMENT    OF    A    SOLDIER. 

did  not  learn,  but  an  officer  vastly  more  humane  than 
the  colonel,  made  his  appearance,  and,  upon  our  re- 
monstrance, had  the  Mexican  prisoners  taken  out  of 
our  room  and  a  barrel  of  water  brought  us.  In  the 
mean  time  I  purchased  a  tin  cup  of  water,  which 
had  greatly  relieved  me ;  and  while  our  men  were 
drinking  at  the  barrel,  a  dirty  soldier  of  the  regi- 
ment came  in,  thrust  his  gourd  and  hand  into  the 
water  up  to  his  wrist,  and,  when  ordered  out,  re- 
plied in  the  most  contemptuous  manner  that  "  we 
were  nothing  but  robber  prisoners."  This  was 
too  much  for  my  Southern  temper  under  the  cha- 
fings  of  that  day.  I  smashed  his  gourd  against  the 
floor,  seized  the  fellow  by  the  throat,  and  kicked 
him  out  of  the  door  into  the  midst  of  his  regi- 
ment. As  might  be  supposed,  it  was  an  insult  to 
the  whole  regiment  for  a  "  heretic  robber-prisoner" 
thus  to  treat  one  of  the  "  magnanimous  nation,"  and 
they  showed  strong  indications  of  punishing  it  in  a 
sanguinary  manner,  when  the  lieutenant-colonel 
came  forward  to  quell  the  excitement.  He  in- 
quired the  cause  of  it,  and  was  informed  that  I 
had  kicked  one  of  the  soldiers  out  of  the  room, 
and  would  do  so  again  when  occasion  required  it, 
when  he  ordered  that  no  soldier  in  future  should 
be  permitted  to  come  into  our  apartment.  My  treat- 
ment of  this  fellow  had  this  good  effect :  if  it  did 
not  give  us  more  bread,  it  gained  us  more  respect. 

March  4th.     To-day,  our  feet  being  exceedingly 
sore  from  our  yesterday's  march  over  the  mountain, 


DOLORES. SAN    MIGUEL    EL    GRANDE.  197 

we  were  permitted  to  hire  a  few  mules,  and  eight 
leagues  brought  us  to  Dolores,  a  handsome  town  of 
several  thousand  inhabitants.  We  remained  at  this 
place  all  the  5th ;  it  being  Sabbath,  the  regiment 
had  to  undergo  review,  &c.  This  town  is  celebra- 
ted as  the  place  where,  in  1809,  the  priest  Hidalgo 
first  assembled  his  desultory  forces  and  commenced 
the  Revolution.  We  have  already  passed  over  the 
ground  of  his  final  defeat,  where  the  king's  troops, 
under  Calleja,  beat  with  great  slaughter  his  mob- 
army,  took  him  prisoner,  and  recaptured  his  im- 
mense spoil  of  many  millions  which  he  had  taken 
from  Guanaxuato  and  other  cities.  To  this  re- 
markable man  is  due  the  credit  for  the  good  or  evil 
which  has  resulted  to  Mexico  by  a  severance  from 
the  mother  country.  He  it  was  that  put  the  ball  in 
motion,  and  though  his  life  paid  the  forfeit,  other 
and  worse  men  have  shared  the  spoils. 

March  6th.  We  were  marched  ten  leagues  to 
San  Miguel  el  Grande,  a  city  of  about  fifteen  thou- 
sand people,  built  upon  the  side  of  a  steep  hill,  and 
bountifully  watered  by  a  mountain  stream.  Here 
we  were  quartered  in  a  filthy,  unfurnished  room, 
upon  the  ground  floor  of  an  extensive  cathedral,  the 
upper  apartments  of  which  are  used  as  a  college, 
and  which  is  celebrated  as  the  institution  where  Hi- 
dalgo was  educated.  The  name  of  Hidalgo  seems 
,to  be  held  in  great  reverence  here ;  we  saw  it  in- 
scribed in  sundry  places  about  the  town.  Our  room 
opened  upon  a  court  in  which  a  delicious  jet  dJcau 


198  DISCOVER    THE    COMET. 

fell  into  a  large  stone  reservoir,  where  we  had  the 
luxury  of  washing  our  face  and  hands  to  our  hearts' 
content.  This  luxury,  almost  as  indispensable  to 
Texians,  or  the  nation  from  whence  most  of  us 
sprang,  as  eating,  is  almost  unknown  in  Mexico  ; 
we  rarely  saw  an  officer  or  soldier  wash  his  face. 
To-day  we  were  stopped  to  noon  it  at  one  of  the 
confiscated  haciendas  of  the  Jesuits,  in  a  delightful 
and  well-watered  valley,  where  there  is  an  exten- 
sive and  beautiful  church,  which,  though  built  a 
long  time  since,  the  scriptural  paintings  upon  the 
dome  and  outside  are  still  brilliant.  We  were  for- 
ced into  a  filthy  alley,  only  a  few  feet  in  width, 
communicating  directly  with  the  comiin,  the  most 
horrible  smelling  of  all  places,  where  we  had  either 
to  eat  or  fast. 

March  7th.  Marched  eight  leagues  to  the  "burn- 
ed hacienda,"  where  we  were  lodged  in  a  stable.  This 
night,  for  the  first  time,  we  discovered  the  comet; 
and  to  obtain  a  clearer  view,  all  hands  had  to  mount 
the  horse -trough.  We  had  an  excited  argument 
among  ourselves  whether  it  was  a  comet,  or  what  it 
was ;  and  the  warmth  with  which  we  debated  the 
matter  excited  the  curiosity  as  well  as  alarmed  the 
fears  of  our  ignorant  guards.  They  inquired  of  us 
what  it  meant,  and  we  told  them  that  "it  was  a 
messenger  sent  by  God,  which  foretold  bloody  war 
at  the  capital,  for  its  tail  pointed  in  that  direction." 
This  was  a  reasonable  reply ;  for  several  days  we 
had  met  news,  all  of  which  tended  to  show  that  a 


MEXICANS   MEET  DANGER  WITH  A  PRAYER.      199 

formidable  outbreak  was  daily  expected  at  the  cap- 
ital against  Santa  Anna,  and  that  he  was  calling 
this,  one  of  his  favourite  regiments,  near  his  person 
in  anticipation  of  some  such  event.  The  work- 
ings of  the  sentinel's  lips,  and  the  shy  and  rapid 
motion  of  crossing  himself  in  prayer,  soon  show- 
ed that  our  tale  had  the  desired  effect :  that  night 
several  of  them  deserted. 

Let  a  Mexican  be  capsized  in  the  middle  of  a  riv- 
er, instead  of  swimming  he  will  stop  to  say  his  pray- 
ers. Let  him  be  at  sea  in  a  storm,  instead  of  laying 
hold  of  the  ropes  he  will  stop  to  say  his  prayers. 
Let  any  danger  beset  him  on  land,  instead  of  apply- 
ing himself  to  meet  the  emergency  he  appeals  to  his 
patron  saint.  I  was  informed  by  Lieutenant  Tay- 
lor, of  her  Britannic  majesty's  navy,  who  was  on 
board  the  Mexican  steamer  Montezuma,  off  Cam- 
peachy,  when  Commodore  Moore  first  attacked 
them,  that  the  whole  Mexican  portion  of  the  crew 
fled  below  and  went  to  prayers  to  supplicate  the  Holy 
Virgin  to  stand  between  them  and  danger.  He  gave 
it  to  me  as  his  opinion  that,  had  the  breeze  lasted 
for  Commodore  Moore  to  come  to  close  quarters 
at  that  time,  the  Mexican  navy  would  have  fallen  an 
easy  prey.  Extremely  farcical  and  ludicrous  as  pray- 
ers at  such  a  time  must  have  appeared  to  a  British 
officer,  a  repetition  of  them  could  not  be  submitted 
to  when  the  reputation  of  a  British  officer  was  con- 
cerned. This  officer  then  quitted  that  service  with 
as  much  disgust  as  he,  on  the  other  hand,  entertain- 


200  CRUEL    TREATMENT. 

ed  admiration  of  the  naval  skill  and  gallantry  of  our 
commodore. 

This  day  the  officer  of  our  guard  proved  himself 
to  be  a  most  finished  young  savage.  On  several  oc- 
casions he  refused  us  water  when  it  was  entirely 
convenient,  for  no  stopping  of  our  guard  interfered 
at  all  with  the  movements  of  the  regiment,  we  being 
kept  far  enough  in  the  rear  to  have  the  full  benefit 
of  the  most  intolerable  dust.  In  no  country  have  I 
witnessed  the  dust  comparable  to  the  dry  season  in 
Mexico.  At  noon  this  day  we  were  stopped  for 
three  hours  in  the  road,  exposed  to  the  heat  of  a 
broiling  sun,  while  the  officers  were  eating  and  ta- 
king their  siesta  in  the  houses. 

March  8th.  Marched  four  leagues  to  a  hacienda, 
where  we  were  stopped  at  noon  and  placed  in  a  sta- 
ble, while  the  officers,  as  usual,  were  enjoying  all  the 
luxuries  of  the  spacious  buildings.  In  the  evening 
the  march  was  continued  four  leagues  more,  and  we, 
with  the  Mexican  prisoners,  were  lodged  in  a  strong 
stone  house,  used  as  a  granary.  To-day  our  officer 
of  the  guard  was  more  humane,  and,  from  the  small 
gold  ring  he  wore  in  his  left  ear,  it  was  evident  he 
had  been  one  of  our  San  Jacinto  prisoners.  This 
mark  of  distinction,  I  was  informed,  is  honorary,  and 
observed  by  most  of  the  officers  who  survived  the 
perils  of  that  day. 

March  9th.  This  day  we  had  the  good  fortune 
again  to  have  another  humane  officer  of  our  guard. 
He  refused  to  let  the  guards  follow  us  on  occasions 


ADJUTANT    MURRY    TAKEN    ILL.  201 

which  need  not  be  specified.  He  would  stop  with 
us  at  the  pulque  stands  on  the  roadside  and  partake 
of  that  delightful  beverage,  and  showed  us  all  the 
kindness  in  his  power.  This  night  we  were  halted 
at  the  end  of  five  leagues,  and  quartered  in  a  strong 
stone  granary. 

March  10th.  Marched  five  leagues  to  San  Juan 
del  Rio,  a  beautiful  town  of  about  ten  thousand  in- 
habitants. At  this  place  Adjutant  Murry  was  taken 
very  ill,  insomuch  that  we  did  not  expect  him  to  sur- 
vive many  minutes.  When  Colonel  Terris  came  into 
our  quarters,  pretending  to  sympathize  on  the  occa- 
sion, he  was  told  by  Colonel  Fisher,  Dr.  Shepherd, 
and  others,  that  it  was  his  cruelty  which  had  brought 
on  his  illness ;  that  he  had  taken  the  old  man's  mule 
from  him,  and  the  rapid  gait  he  had  been  forced  in 
his  lame  condition  was  the  cause  of  his  attack.  In 
fine,  the  abuse  that  we  poured  upon  him  was  by  no 
means  measured,  which  caused  the  old  monster  to 
leave  our  quarters  without  ceremony. 

March  11th.  Marched  ten  leagues  before  we 
wTere  halted  to  noon  it,  and  placed  in  a  stable  with 
the  horses,  mules,  and  asses.  This  long  march  was 
exceedingly  fatiguing,  and  we  suffered  badly  for  wa- 
ter. After  much  begging,  I  purchased  one  medio 
worth,  while  the  Mexican  soldiers  were  served  with 
large  caskfuls  in  our  presence. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  officer  of  our  guard  retailed 
a  barrel  of  pulque  to  our  companions  at  an  unusual 
high  price.     The  settlement  between  him  and  the 

C  c 


202  MEANNESS    OF    MEXICAN    OFFICERS. 

owner  of  the  pulque  explained  that  he  was  interested 
in  its  sale,  and,  as  a  more  certain  means  of  making 
us  buy  freely,  we  were  kept  from  water.  After  the 
pulque  was  sold,  and  just  as  the  march  was  about  to 
be  resumed,  we  were  furnished  water. 

There  is  something  so  inexpressibly  mean  in  this 
transaction,  that  a  captain,  wearing  two  epaulets, 
should  be  guilty  of  such  low  thieving,  will  be  difficult 
of  belief  in  the  United  States  or  any  honourable  ser- 
vice. The  moral  grade  of  honour  governing  the 
Mexican  service  may  be  better  estimated  from  the 
fact  that  there  were  several  officers  who  would  bor- 
row from  one  to  five,  and  in  one  case  as  high  as  ten 
dollars  from  us,  whose  funds  they  must  have  presumed 
to  be  low,  under,  in  every  instance,  the  most  solemn 
promise  that  at  some  place  ahead  they  would  return 
it.  In  no  instance  was  a  shilling  ever  returned ;  and 
though  we  loaned  the  money  in  no  expectation  that 
it  would  be  returned,  yet  these  loans  were  servicea- 
ble to  us  in  two  respects.  The  borrower  looked 
upon  it  as  an  appeal  to  his  better  treatment  of  us, 
and  it  generally  had  that  effect,  while  the  amount 
loaned  to  different  officers  served  to  designate  them. 
Thus,  instead  of  using  our  vernacular  English  upon 
the  hard  Spanish  names,  we  would,  "for  short?  call 
such  a  one  "  Sergeant  Ten  Dollars,"  "  Lieutenant 
Three  Dollars,"  or  "  Captain  Five  Dollars,"  accord- 
ing to  the  amounts  which  they  respectively  borrowed. 

Another  characteristic  peculiar  to  the  "magnani- 
mous nation"  is,  that  they  not  only  do  not  wash  their 


USES    OF    THE    TORTILLA.  203 

faces,  but  they  do  not  wash  the  plates  in  which  they 
serve  dinner.  The  sutler-woman,  in  bringing  round 
to  us  for  sale  large  earthen  jars  of  hashed  mutton, 
"  chile,"  and  tortillas,  would  first  serve  to  their  own 
officers  a  saucer  full  generally  for  a  medio,  the  six- 
teenth of  a  dollar,  which  they  would  eat  with  their 
fingers.  There  are  only  a  few  of  the  richest  peo- 
ple in  Mexico  who  own  knives  and  forks,  and  the 
most  of  them  handle  them  with  as  little  grace  as  a 
cornfield  negro  would  a  rapier.  The  tortilla  is  a 
cake  of  bread  made  of  Indian  corn,  about  the  thick- 
ness of  upper  leather,  and  quite  as  pliant.  This 
cake  not  only  serves  the  Mexicans  as  bread,  but  an- 
swers the  triple  purpose  of  knife,  fork,  and  spoon: 
he  with  surprising  dexterity  will  tear  off  a  piece, 
and  with  his  thumb  and  the  two  first  fingers  of  his 
dexter  hand,  the  fore  finger  being  in  the  centre,  so 
as  to  give  it  a  spoon  shape,  dip  up  the  red  chops, 
and  at  every  dip  a  new  spoon  disappears.  The  im- 
mense quantity  of  chile,  "  red  pepper,"  used  in  cook- 
ing gives  everything  cooked  more  the  appearance  of 
being  submerged  in  a  paint-bucket  of  oil  and  red 
lead  than  eatable  gravy.  Usually,  after  their  officers, 
and  frequently  their  dirtiest  soldiers,  would  sop  their 
saucers  empty,  not  clean,  our  dinner  would  be  served 
in  the  same  without  washing.  On  frequent  occa- 
sions, the  sutler-woman,  for  decency  sake,  would 
take  the  lately-used  saucer,  and,  crooking  the  fore 
finger  of  her  right  hand  in  a  half  moon  shape,  run  it 
round  the  inside  of  the  vessel  with  surprising  expert- 


204  AN    APOLOGY    FOR    A    DISHCLOTH. 

ness,  and  then  give  the  aforesaid  semicircled  finger 
a  flirt  to  rid  it  of  its  contents,  in  readiness  to  serve 
the  next. 

On  this  occasion,  a  fat  young  sutler- woman  brought 
into  our  stable  a  jar  of  this  hashed  victuals.  After 
quietly  sitting  flat  upon  the  ground,  in  the  manner 
of  United  States  tailors — the  Mexican  tailors  sit 
upon  stools* — she  commenced  fingering  the  lately- 
used  saucer  in  the  manner  above  described.  Being 
hungry,  and  my  temper  not  the  most  placid,  on  ac- 
count of  the  pulque  imposition,  I  ordered  her  to  take 
her  finger  out  of  my  saucer  and  wash  it.  "  What 
does  he  want  V  she  said  to  the  interpreter.  When 
my  order  was  explained,  the  good-natured  creature 
burst  forth  into  a  laugh  which  made  her  fat  sides 
shake ;  and  all  the  satisfaction  I  could  get  was,  "  That 
you  are  the  strangest  people  I  ever  saw ;  I  haven't  a 
doubt  but  that  you  have  eaten  many  a  peck  of  dirt 
before." 

After  the  Mexican  officers  had  finished  their  si- 
esta, all  except  one  old  colonel  came  forth  into  the 
stable-yard  where  we  were  confined.  Each  had  in 
his  hand  a  lasso,  with  a  running  noose  at  one  end 

*  I  have  observed  that  individual  habit  is  not  more  inveterate  than  na- 
tional, even  in  small  matters.  In  Mexico,  while  working  at  their  trade, 
the  tailors  sit  upon  stools,  while  the  English  race  set  flat  upon  a  board, 
with  their  legs  crossed  under  them.  In  Mexico  the  barbers  turn  their 
razors  upon  the  edge  in  stropping,  while  ours  turn  theirs  upon  the  back. 
Their  barbers  use  their  fingers  to  lather  one's  beard,  while  our  people 
would  consider  it  extremely  filthy  to  have  a  fellow  fingering  about  their 
lips.  One  of  our  petit  inconveniences  was  in  failing  to  find  a  shaving- 
brush  for  sale  in  all  Mexico. 


THROWING    THE    LASSO.  205 

of  it,  ready  for  throwing.  To  catch  a  hog  or  a  mule 
by  the  foot  when  running  is  esteemed  by  them  a 
high  accomplishment,  and  for  a  time  they  seemed 
to  be  proud  of  the  amusement  it  afforded  us,  until 
they  ascertained  that  we  were  laughing  in  ridicule 
of  their  national  gymnastics.  One  of  our  men, 
whose  wardrobe  was  not  worth  six  cents  in  a  fair 
market,  told  one  of  these  gilt-laced  gentry,  "  Why, 
sir,  I  would  flog  one  of  my  negroes  if  he  were  guilty 
of  such  unintellectual  stupidity  as  to  throw  a  rope 
over  a  pig's  head."  "  How,  then,"  said  the  officer, 
"  do  you  catch  your  cavallos  and  chickens  1"  "Well," 
answered  the  Republican,  "  the  former  we  learn  to 
come  to  the  bridle ;  the  latter,  wre  cut  their  throats 
with  the  rifle,  and  we  don't  claim  any  that  is  hit  on 
the  head."  " Hal  Dios /"  (my  God!)  he  exclaimed, 
"  what  a  strange  people  you  are !" 

Had  I  Santa  Anna's  power  in  Mexico,  as  it  is  his 
duty,  and  should  enter  deeply  into  his  military  glo- 
ry, I  would  abolish  in  the  army  the  extravagant  use 
of  chile,  and  make  it  highly  punishable  for  an  officer 
to  pack  his  bed  or  indulge  in  the  siesta.  These 
effeminate  indulgences  are  more  calculated  to  make 
women  than  soldiers.  The  extravagant  use  of  chile 
is  as  hurtful  to  energy  as  the  too  great  use  of  ardent 
spirits.  Before  dinner,  the  slothful  gait  and  languid 
countenance  of  the  Mexican  shows  the  absence  of 
this  stimulant,  when,  after  dinner,  its  effects  make 
the  siesta  indispensable.  Santa  Anna  was  enjoy- 
ing the  sweets  of  this  evening  sleep  at  San  Jacinto 


206  FLEAS    AND    LICE. 

when  "  that  mishap,"  as  he  calls  it,  befell  him ;  and 
experience  should  have  long  since  taught  him  the 
force  of  these  observations.  I  would  also  reduce 
that  officer  to  the  ranks  who  would  be  guilty  of  the 
low  accomplishment  of  throwing  the  lasso.  It  has 
been  said  that  "  the  Texian  is  born  with  a  rifle  in 
his  hand,"  and  with  equal  truth  it  may  be  said 
that  "  the  Mexican  is  born  with  a  rope  in  his,"  for 
at  every  Mexican  settlement  we  noticed  the  chil- 
dren, from  knee  high  and  upward,  with  little  ropes, 
catching  the  ducks  and  chickens.  It  appeared  to 
be  their  only  amusement ;  and  they  would  throw 
them  with  remarkable  certainty.  The  old  roosters 
and  drakes,  that  had  been  often  taken  this  way,  seem- 
ed to  know  how  useless  it  was  to  attempt  escape, 
and  would  squat  to  receive  the  rope  when  they  saw 
it  coming.  In  Mexico  the  lasso  is  used  for  catch- 
ing every  animal,  from  a  wild  bull  to  the  tamest 
dunghill  fowl ;  nor  is  its  use  unknown  in  recruiting 
"their  volunteers"  for  the  army.  Our  comrades  used 
to  say  that  "these  blanketed,  pepper-eating  fellows 
would  not  believe  a  thing  was  caught  at  all  unless 
it  was  done  with  a  rope." 

This  evening  we  were  marched  two  leagues  to 
Arroyo  Saco,  and  jammed  into  a  subterranean  room, 
covered  with  trodden  straw,  from  which,  whenever 
stirred,  the  most  suffocating  dust  would  fill  the  room. 
Added  to  this,  the  pulgas,  fleas — not  by  the  count, 
for  there  are  not  numerals  enough  in  mathematics  to 
give  an  idea  of  their  number,  but  in  bushels — the 


LOCKED    UP. PROTEST.  207 

pulgas  completely  usurped  the  dominion  of  tliepiojos, 
lice ;  and  the  only  advantage  we  experienced  from 
them  was,  that  their  frisky  activity  made  us  for  the 
time  insensible  to  the  slow,  plodding  operations  of 
the  latter.  They  acted  as  counter-irritants,  for  the 
same  reason  that  a  negro  puts  red  pepper  in  his  eye 
to  cure  the  toothache. 

What  made  this  night  the  more  insufferable  was 
that,  notwithstanding  there  were  numerous  unoccu- 
pied and  comfortable  apartments  in  this  building, 
which  we  were  not  permitted  to  occupy,  we  were 
refused  the  privilege  of  sleeping  in  the  open  court 
upon  the  pavement.  Colonel  Fisher  and  myself 
addressed  the  following  note  to  the  colonel,  from 
whom  we  received  no  reply : 

"  Sir, — We  have  been  placed  in  a  miserable  barn, 
where  the  dust  and  vermin  are  insufferable,  and  we 
take  this  means  of  requesting  the  gracious  privilege 
of  sleeping  upon  the  pavement  in  the  open  court. 
We  have  not  time  now  to  remonstrate  against  con- 
duct which  is  in  such  flagrant  violation  of  the  arti- 
cles of  our  capitulation  and  of  every  principle  of 
civilized  warfare." 

March  12th.  All  hands  rejoiced  at  the  appear- 
ance of  daylight,  and  the  prospect  of  escaping  from 
our  most  horrible  lodgings.  Four  miserable  small 
burros  being  furnished  our  sick  and  lame,  we  com- 
menced our  march  after  shaking  off  myriads  of  fleas. 


208  A    NIGHT    OF    SUFFERING. 

After  marching  two  leagues,  Colonel  Fisher  and 
myself  procured  each  a  broken-down  pack-mule, 
for  which  the  owner  exacted  double  price.  At  the 
end  of  seven  leagues  we  were  halted  for  the  night, 
and  the  lieutenant-colonel  had  us  lodged  in  two 
rooms,  furnished  with  a  pine  table  and  a  bench 
each.  I  saw  but  little  furniture  even  in  the  best 
houses  in  Mexico.  In  fact,  we  usually  see  better 
furniture  and  more  comforts  in  the  most  indifferent 
hotels  of  the  United  States  than  in  the  best  in  Mex- 
ico. There  it  is  as  usual  for  the  traveller  to  pack 
his  bed,  as  it  is  in  the  United  States  for  the  travel- 
ler to  pack  his  saddlebags.  The  traveller,  in  stop- 
ping for  the  night,  leases  a  room  in  the  meson,  inn, 
and  pays  for  his  provender  according  to  the  price 
stipulated  and  the  amount  furnished. 

At  ten  o'clock  this  night  the  officer  of  the  guard 
locked  our  door,  which,  when  closed,  was  like  an 
hermetical  seal.  Such  a  number,  when  confined  in 
so  small  a  place,  had  a  reasonable  prospect  of  suf- 
focating. The  suffocations  in  the  black  holes  of  In- 
dia, and  the  prison-ships  of  England  in  the  Revo- 
lutionary War  of  the  United  States,  appeared  to  our 
imaginations  in  the  full  force  of  reality.  Our  little 
knowledge  of  the  component  parts  of  the  atmosphere 
gave  us  no  relief.  We  calculated  how  long  the  oxy- 
gen in  a  cubic  foot  would  sustain  life— how  many 
cubic  feet  in  the  room — the  number  of  persons  in 
the  room,  and  the  length  of  time  we  had  to  occupy 
it.     This  calculation  was  the  result  of  the  instant, 


LETTER    TO    THE    COMMANDANT.  209 

and  it  left  a  woful  quotient  for  our  consolation. 
We  rose  from  our  pavement,  struck  a  light,  and  Col- 
onel Fisher  and  myself  addressed  the  following  note 
to  the  commandant : 

"  To  the  Colonel  commanding  the  4th  Regi- ) 
ment  of  Infantry,  Mexican  Army.  > 

Sir, — We  have  been  locked  up  in  a  small  close 
room,  where  not  a  breath  of  air  can  enter  except 
by  the  door.  It  is  useless  to  remark  upon  this  un- 
comfortable situation ;  but  if  by  this  order  you  in- 
tend to  insinuate  that  it  is  our  intention  or  desire  to 
escape,  we,  as  honourable  men  and  officers,  cast 
back  the  insinuation  with  that  resentment  which 
such  gratuitous  cruelty  deserves. 

"  We  have  no  hesitation  in  believing  that  we  are 
far  more  anxious  to  reach  the  city  of  Mexico  than 
yourself,  where  we  may  be  placed  in  the  hands  of 
the  high  functionaries  of  your  government,  whose 
regard  for  the  pledged  faith  and  '  magnanimity'  of 
the  nation,  it  is  hoped,  will  deal  with  us  in  a  far  dif- 
ferent manner  than  has  been  your  pleasure. 

"  Had  it  been  our  wish  to  escape,  we  had  ample 
opportunities  eight  hundred  miles  nearer  home  to  do 
so ;  but  this  we  could  not  do  without  a  violation  of 
our  words  and  honour,  which  we  are  taught  in  our 
nation  to  hold  inviolable." 

From  the  reiterated  promises  of  General  Ampu- 
dia  in  Matamoras,  we  believed  that  when  we  reach- 
ed Mexico  we  would  be  able  to  negotiate  terms  ad- 

Dd 


210  A    DAY    WITHOUT    FOOD. 

vantageous  to  our  fellow-prisoners,  and  we  gave  him 
our  word  that  we  would  cheerfully  go  there  in  such 
hope.  Though  frequent  opportunities  of  escape 
presented  themselves  previous  to  this  time,  we  were 
influenced  not  only  by  the  word  we  had  pledged, 
but  by  the  ardent  desire  of  serving  with  our  pres- 
ence our  countrymen  at  the  capital.  I  know  that 
no  fear  of  consequences  to  myself,  and  I  believe  the 
same  of  Colonel  Fisher,  would  have  induced  a  for- 
feiture of  our  word.  On  the  other  hand,  we  did 
not  believe  the  colonel  commanding  overly- anxious 
to  reach  the  city.  The  daily  news  we  met  of  rev- 
olution in  that  quarter  certainly  did  not  hurry  him 
forward  any. 

After  we  had  written  the  above  note  to  the  colo- 
nel, we  gave  it  to  the  sergeant  of  the  guard  to  be 
delivered.  He  returned  in  an  hour,  bringing  back 
the  note,  with  an  excuse  for  not  doing  so. 

March  13th.  We  were  permitted  to  hire  three 
worn-out  pack-mules  to  help  our  party  on,  and  start- 
ed without  breakfast.  Five  leagues  distant  we  were 
marched  into  a  corral,  while  the  officers  of  the  regi- 
ment were  eating  their  dinner  in  the  buildings.  We 
sent  out  money  to  purchase  something  to  eat,  and 
just  as  it  was  about  to  be  brought  in,  the  bugle 
sounded  the  march.  No  breakfast,  and  after  five 
leagues'  rapid  march,  no  dinner,  put  us  all  in  ill  hu- 
mour :  a  hungry  man  can  feel  very  ill ;  some  swore, 
while  the  more  religious  would  clinch  their  teeth  in 
silence,   their  dilating  nostrils  showing  that  they 


MEXICAN    VALOUR.  211 

felt  no  better  than  those  who  gave  expression  to 
their  feelings.  As  we  were  marched  forth  from  our 
cow-pen,  the  colonel  rode  out  of  the  court  of  the 
building  immediately  to  our  left.  This  was  the  first 
opportunity  I  had  for  delivering  the  letter  which  the 
sergeant  refused  to  do  the  night  previous.  I  passed 
through  the  line  of  guards  and  presented  him  the 
note.  In  the  act  of  doing  so,  Dr.  Shepherd  said, 
"  That  is  right,  general,  give  it  to  the  old  scoun- 
drel :"  he  received  it,  and  read  but  a  few  lines,  when 
he  called  Mr.  Van  Ness  to  him,  and  asked  him  who 
that  man  was  that  cursed  him,  and  to  say  to  him 
that  if  he  did  so  again  he  would  have  him  shot : 
"  that  I  am  a  man  of  but  one  word."  The  doctor 
replied,  "  If  he  wishes  to  shoot,  let  him  shoot ;  I  am 
ready  to  be  shot."  This  reply  so  vexed  the  old  fel- 
low that  he  made  an  attempt  to  draw  his  sword,  but 
putting  it  back,  he  rode  up  and  struck  the  doctor 
upon  the  face,  at  which  several  of  our  party  hallooed 
out  to  the  doctor  to  give  him  his  whip.  Dr.  S.  told 
him  that  that  was  Mexican  valour — muy  valiente, 
very  brave — to  strike  a  prisoner,  and  that,  if  he  was 
upon  an  equality  of  circumstances,  he  would  not 
dare  it.  The  colonel,  who  understood  English  well, 
seemed  sensible  of  the  rebuke,  and  rode  off.  Lan- 
guage fails  me  in  expressing  my  contempt  of  a  trans- 
action so  supremely  mean  and  cowardly — that  one 
wearing  the  insignia  of  honour  and  bravery  should 
strike  his  equal  whose  hands  were  tied.  Two 
leagues  farther  brought  us  to  Tepee,  where  we  were 
quartered  for  the  night. 


212  VALLEY    OF    MEXICO. 

March  14th.  Seven  leagues  to-day  brought  us 
to  Guarticlan,  where  we  were  quartered,  as  usual,  in 
a  filthy  apartment. 

March  15th.  At  3  o'clock  A.M.  the  bugle  sound- 
ed the  march,  and  we  had  seven  leagues  to  go  be- 
fore reaching  Tacubaya,  a  small  town  upon  an  ele- 
vation in  the  Valley  of  Mexico,  about  four  miles 
southwest  of  the  city.  At  broad  daylight  we  com- 
menced descending  into  the  Valley  of  Mexico,  and 
the  prospect  was  sublimely  beautiful.  It  looked  as 
if  we  were  entering  into  Elysium.  With  tremendous 
high  mountains  surrounding  the  valley,  which  is  a 
basin  of  about  thirty  by  sixty  English  miles,  and  laid 
off  in  labours,  beautifully  ditched,  and  highly  cultiva- 
ted with  the  schinus,  osiers,  and  other  evergreens 
growing  upon  the  ditches,  and  overlapping  the  roads 
with  their  luxurious  foliage  in  every  direction — with 
a  magnificent  city  in  the  centre,  and  numerous  small- 
er towns  filled  with  spires,  and  scattered  over  the 
plain  wherever  the  eye  could  reach,  gave  the  view 
an  air  of  enchantment,  which  to  be  enjoyed  must  be 
seen.  When  we  reached  the  plain  below,  it  was  not 
difficult  to  imagine  that  we  were  on  the  highest 
and  most  choice  spot  upon  the  earth,  surrounded  by 
a  tremendous  high  wall,  for  such  is  the  appearance 
of  the  porphyritic  mountain  sides  which  surround 
the  valley ;  but  when  we  looked  up  to  the  eternal 
snow-mountains  of  Popocatepetl  and  Istazihuatl  far 
above  us,  we  could  as  easily  imagine  we  were  far 
into  the  earth's  cavity.     However,  it  is  not  for  me 


MELANCHOLY    REFLECTIONS.  213 

to  give  life  to  this  scene.  I  write  "  with  a  running 
pen"*  and  in  a  tyrant's  chains ;  and  though  I  may 
have  viewed  the  ancient  valley  of  Anahuac  and  the 
place  of  Tenochtitlan  as  did  Humbolt,  Poinsett, 
Ward,  Prescott,  Myer,  and  others,  they  were  in  bet- 
ter humour,  and  had  more  leisure  to  do  justice  to 
this  classic  panorama. 

Thus,  after  years  of  fond  hope  that  peace  and 
competence  would  enable  me  to  visit  this  place,  so 
celebrated  as  the  site  of  aboriginal  refinement  in  the 
New  World,  and  more  celebrated  still  as  the  place  of 
the  most  remarkable  conquests  in  the  annals  of  man- 
kind, here  am  I  a  prisoner  and  in  rags,  treated  with 
the  contumely  and  cruelty  of  a  felon,  because  we 
dared  to  war  for  our  country,  and  fight  her  enemy 
in  a  manner  she  expected  of  us  :  thus,  I  say,  to  be 
compelled  to  view  the  city  of  the  Montezumas — to 
be  able  to  give  but  a  passing  glimpse  at  the  aque- 
ducts, calzadas,  and  teocallis  of  that  remarkable 
people — to  glance  at  the  bloody  paths  of  Cortes 
and  Alvarado,  is  what  I  could  not  have  preferred. 
However,  it  is  a  tribute  which  some  have  to  pay  to 
liberty,  and  it  is  as  well  that  it  should  have  fallen 
upon  us  as  upon  better  men  :  it  is  the  fate  of  war, 
and  we  bear  it  with  the  fortitude  of  men. 

We  reached  the  western  suburbs  of  the  city,  where 
we  halted  a  few  minutes  in  front  of  a  large  church, 

*  I  should  have  said,  with  a  pen  running.  The  common  application  of 
the  currente  calamo  would  betray  a  vanity  which  belongs  not  to  this  hur- 
ried scribbling. 


214  the  archbishop's  palace. 

and  purchased  some  bread  and  fruit  for  our  break- 
fast. From  this  place  we  veered  to  the  right,  and 
fell  into  a  road  which  led  to  Tacubaya,  which 
place  we  reached  about  noon,  where  the  regiment 
were  quartered  in  a  portion  of  the  archbishop's  pal- 
ace, which  had  formerly  been  used  as  a  convent. 
This  is  an  extensive  building,  adjoining  a  church, 
to  which  is  attached  a  spacious  enclosure  of  fruit- 
trees  and  evergreens.  The  portion  of  the  building 
occupied  by  the  regiment  contained  a  great  many 
rooms  both  upon  the  lower  and  upper  floors,  a  num- 
ber of  which  were  appropriated  to  the  use  of  the 
officers  and  soldiers.  In  the  centre  of  the  building 
was  an  open  court,  surrounded  by  a  double  corridor. 
The  sides  of  this  parallelogram,  both  below  and 
above,  were  covered  with  large-sized  scriptural  paint- 
ings upon  canvass,  representing  every  stage  of  the 
crucifixion  of  Christ.  The  artist  must  have  been 
a  Mexican,  for  he  has  mixed  in  several  of  his  pieces 
a  rare  combination  of  Mexican  taste.  In  one  piece, 
for  instance,  after  our  Saviour  was  nailed  to  the 
cross,  and  surrounded  by  the  unbelieving  Israelites, 
he  has  a  Jew  in  full  ranchero's  costume,  mounted 
upon  a  bushy-maned,  long-tailed  mustang,  spear  in 
hand,  charging  upon  him.  The  blood  flowing  from 
his  side,  with  forgiveness  upon  his  countenance,  and 
unrelenting  persecution  in  the  surrounding  multitude, 
is  a  melancholy  sight,  and  enough  to  make  Mexi- 
cans hate  Jews.  The  gray-bearded  followers  of 
the  cross,  looking  down  upon  us  in  every  direction, 


PLEASANT    QUARTERS.  215 

admonished  how  perishable  are  the  things  of  this 
world,  while  the  benign  and  angelic  beauty  of  the 
Holy  Virgin,  just  above,  whose  eyes  appeared  bent 
upon  our  lowly  couch,  seemed  to  pity  our  condition. 
Just  beyond,  one  of  the  fathers  is  blessing  the  young 
Messiah,  whose  cherub  beauty,  surrounded  by  a  halo 
of  glory,  showed  that  he  was  coming  to  illume  a  be- 
nighted world.  The  effect  of  these  numerous  paint- 
ings upon  a  Catholic  population  is  calculated  to  in- 
spire reverence  for  their  religion :  it  made  us  Prot- 
estants feel  like  better  men. 

In  the  centre  of  this  court  is  a  water  spout,  emp- 
tying an  ample  supply  of  the  delicious  liquid,  fresh 
from  the  aqueduct  of  Chapultepec,  into  a  large 
stone  basin,  around  which  we  drank,  and  washed 
our  faces  over  and  again.  In  this  open  court,  upon 
this  brick  pavement,  myself  and  companions  were 
quartered. 

It  was  but  a  little  time  before  the  candy-girls  as- 
certained that  we  had  money  ;  and  being  greatly 
rejoiced,  as  we  believed  that  this  was  the  termina- 
tion of  our  march,  we  luxuriated  in  sweet  cakes  and 
ice  creams.  Having  procured  a  gourd  full  of  vino 
mascal,  we  did  not  forget  in  our  thanksgiving  that, 
through  the  goodness  of  God,  our  distinguished  coun- 
tryman, General  Andrew  Jackson,  had  this  day  reach- 
ed his  seventy-sixth  year. 

This  evening  Mr.  Cursin,  bearer  of  despatches 
from  the  government  of  the  United  States,  and  Cap- 
tain West,  came  into  our  quarters  to  see  us.     These 


216  MORE    OF    SAM    HOUSTON. 

gentlemen  manifested  the  liveliest  interest  for  our 
welfare.  Hearing  that  we  were  approaching  the 
city,  they  rode  out  on  the  San  Christoval  road  sev- 
eral leagues  to  meet  us ;  but,  finding  we  had  ta- 
ken a  more  westerly  route,  they  returned,  and  told 
us  "  that  an  order  had  gone  forth  several  days  from 
Santa  Anna  to  shoot  all  our  companions  behind, 
and  doubtless  they  would  be,  if  they  had  not  already 
been  shot ;  that  President  Houston  had  written  to 
Mexico,  through  the  British  charge  d'affaires  in 
Texas,  saying  '  that  though  we  had  entered  Mexi- 
co contrary  to  his  orders,  and  without  authority  of 
law,  yet  he  begged  mercy  for  us ;'  that  our  friends 
in  the  city  thought  us  in  imminent  danger,"  &c.  One 
less  acquainted  with  President  Houston  than  myself 
might  have  ascribed  such  a  letter  to  some  unaccount- 
able misapprehension  or  to  political  stupidity.  But, 
knowing  his  undisguised  malignity  and  cold-blooded 
vindictiveness,  not  only  to  Colonel  Fisher  and  my- 
self, but  others  of  the  Mier  prisoners,  I  lost  not  a 
moment  in  writing  to  my  friends  in  Texas  for  evi- 
dence of  his  falsehood.  I  had  too  much  respect  for 
his  personal  and  political  astuteness  to  believe  that 
he  did  not  know  what  that  letter  would  produce, 
and  I  knew  that  such  official  authority  was  the  high- 
est upon  which  the  President  of  Mexico  could  de- 
sire to  act.  The  evidence  I  wrote  for  to  Texas 
came  in  due  season,  such  as  not  only  satisfied  the 
United  States  minister,  but  even  Santa  Anna  him- 
self, of  Houston's  falsehood ;  and,  without  tiring  the 


FRIENDS    VISIT    US.  217 

reader  here  with  a  recital  of  this  melancholy,  cruel, 
bloody  tragedy,  I  refer  him  to  the  proofs  of  all  that 
1  have  said  in  a  correspondence  published  soon 
after  my  escape  from  prison  in  Mexico.  (See  Ap- 
pendix No.  VI.) 

This  evening  William  Reese  visited  General 
Thompson,  the  United  States  minister  in  Mexico, 
where  this  melancholy  information  of  our  prisoners 
was  confirmed.  The  nights  at  this  season  of  the 
year  in  Mexico  are  cold,  and  though  there  were 
hundreds  of  unoccupied  rooms  in  this  building,  we 
were  compelled  to  quarter  upon  the  pavement  in 
the  open  court  with  our  thin  blankets.  We  suffered 
much  in  body,  but  the  anguish  of  mind  was  far  be- 
yond all  bodily  sufferance.  To  be  butchered  by 
wholesale  as  national  marauders,  by  the  perfidious, 
horrible  decree  of  our  own  President,  without  the 
means  of  proving  to  the  world  his  heinous  falsehood, 
was  to  us  a  mental  torment  far  worse  than  death 
itself. 

March  16th.  Mr.  Cursin,  Captain  West,  and  sev- 
eral other  friends  came  in  to  see  us,  and  brought  the 
welcome  intelligence  that,  through  the  remonstran- 
ces of  the  United  States  and  British  ministers,  Pres- 
ident Santa  Anna  had  countermanded  the  order  for 
shooting  our  men.  This  evening  I  requested  a 
friend  living  in  the  city  to  see  these  ministers,  and 
desire  them  to  call  at  our  prison  the  next  day. 

March  17th.  This  day  we  were  not  furnished  a 
E  E 


218  INTERVIEW    WITH    MR.  PACKENHAM. 

morsel  to  eat,  and  but  for  the  little  private  means 
we  had,  should  have  consequently  fasted. 

The  reason  the  officer  of  the  guard  gave  for  not 
furnishing  our  usual  twenty-five  cents  each  was, 
that  "  he  had  no  money."  General  Thompson,  the 
United  States  minister,  sent  us  word  that  "  he 
thought  he  could  be  of  more  service  by  not  evincing 
too  great  anxiety  in  our  behalf,  and  that  everything 
in  his  power  should  be  done  for  us."  Though  we 
were  thankful  for  General  Thompson's  kind  feel- 
ings, yet  we  were  mortified  at  his  position,  which 
we  feared  in  some  measure  compromised  the  dig- 
nity of  his  government.  Mr.  Packenham,  the  Brit- 
ish minister,  and  suite  came  to  our  prison,  and  met 
us  with  the  most  unostentatious  kindness.  The 
representative  of  the  British  nation  is  no  small  char- 
acter on  any  portion  of  this  globe  where  the  needle 
has  ever  turned.  The  colonel  of  the  regiment,  who, 
since  the  first  day  of  our  arrival  at  Tacubaya,  ap- 
peared in  all  the  ununiform,  gaudy  foppery  of  the 
Mexican  nation,  and  who  paid  less  attention  to  us 
than  if  we  had  been  so  many  animals  in  a  menage- 
rie, when  he  saw  the  British  legation  in  our  prison, 
stood  chapeau  in  hand,  and  looked  as  if  he  were  in 
a  superior  presence.  Mr.  Packenham  inquired  for 
myself,  and  asked  "  if  I  desired  to  see  him."  I  an- 
swered that  "I  did,  and  wished  to  make  intercession 
through  him  for  several  English  subjects,  prisoners 
with  us,  among  whom  were  Captain  Ewin  Cameron, 
Samuel  C.  Lyon,  and  others."    Mr.  Packenham  said 


INTERVIEW  WITH    MR.  PACKENHAM.  219 

that  "  he  would  do  everything  in  his  power  for  these 
men,  but  that  he  feared  much  difficulty  would  inter- 
pose in  this  service ;  that  these  men,  though  they 
were  British  subjects,  had  made  their  own  election 
in  taking  up  arms  against  Mexico,  and  consequently 
had  subjected  themselves  to  all  the  penalties  of  the 
laws  of  war,"  &c.  I  replied,  that  "  by  the  encour- 
agement of  the  commercial  policy  of  Great  Britain, 
these  men  had  become  sojourners  in  Texas ;  that, 
pursuing  trades  which  their  government  had  encour- 
aged, they  had  subjected  themselves  to  the  laws  of 
Texas,  which  required  all  persons,  citizens  or  so- 
journers, after  a  certain  time,  to  take  up  arms  in  her 
defence.  They  had  either  to  forfeit  in  Texas  ben- 
efits which  had  accrued  to  them  by  their  govern- 
mental policy,  or  submit  to  the  lex  loci  where  they 
were  pursuing  their  English  trades."  I  cited  him 
the  case  of  Samuel  C.  Lyon,  then  present.  He  was 
a  shipmaster  by  profession ;  his  father,  mother,  and 
family  then  resided  in  Liverpool,  and  were  highly 
respectable  ;  that,  through  the  commercial  laws  and 
treaties  of  his  country,  he  had  been  for  a  time  in 
Texas,  where  he  had  acquired  property  and  privi- 
leges, the  fruit  of  his  country's  encouragement  and 
his  own  industry,  and  that  I  must  believe  that  there 
was  a  high  obligation  upon  that  country  to  protect 
and  shield  him  ;  that,  had  the  British  government  not 
countenanced  and  encouraged  this  trade,  he  would 
not  have  been  subject  to  his  present  imprisonment. 
Mr.  Packenham  asked  us  "  how  we  were  treated." 


220  SECURITY    OF    THE    BRITISH    SUBJECT. 

I  pointed  to  our  dirty  blankets  upon  the  open  pave- 
ment as  our  bed,  and  requested  him  to  be  his  own 
judge.  He  looked  indignant,  and  replied  that,  "  by 
the  laws  of  war,  as  officers,  we  were  entitled  to  our 
parole,  and  doubtless  it  would  be  extended  to  us;" 
but  that  "  the  same  laws  also  required,  as  a  matter  of 
security,  that  the  soldier  prisoners  should  be  kept 
securely."  He  left  our  prison  with  the  same  kind- 
ness of  manner  that  he  had  entered  it,  and  with  our 
increased  good-will  and  respect,  the  gaudy  fops  of 
officers  who  had  charge  of  us  standing  aside  for  him 
to  pass. 

We  have  had  frequent  occasions  to  be  mortified 
at  the  contempt  in  which  citizens  of  the  United 
States  are  held  and  treated  abroad,  and  particularly 
in  Mexico,  when  no  Roman  citizen  in  her  palmiest 
days  ever  felt  more  pride  and  confidence  in  his  citi- 
zenship than  does  at  present  the  British  subject.  If 
anything  is  more  calculated  than  another  to  lessen 
the  respect  and  attachment  for  one's  country,  it  is  to 
be  compelled  to  disown  her  and  seek  protection  un- 
der another.  Such,  unfortunately,  has  too  often 
been  the  case  with  citizens  of  the  United  States, 
who,  speaking  their  mother  English,  and  with  an 
English  parchment  in  their  pockets,  travel  with  im- 
punity by  denying  that  they  ever  were  in  the  coun- 
try which  gave  them  life.  The  case  of  our  friend 
Lieutenant  C,  of  the  Mier  Expedition,  is  a  striking 
instance.  He  was  a  citizen  of  New- York,  and  after 
his  friends  had  in  vain  exhausted  all  their  influence 


ESTIMATE    OF    NATIONAL    HONOUR.  221 

in  trying  to  procure  his  liberation,  his  mother  recol- 
lected that  he  was  born  at  Halifax,  "  near  the  United 
States  line,"  but  came  over  when  a  few  days  old. 
This  fact,  made  known  to  the  English  minister,  pro- 
cured his  immediate  release. 

As  I  feel  an  abiding  pride  in  that  country  which 
gave  me  birth,  and  in  which  are  my  earliest  and 
dearest  associations,  I  long  to  see  her  assume  a  more 
high-toned  position  in  her  intercourse  with  foreign 
nations.  Heretofore,  unfortunately,  that  government 
has  too  strictly  estimated  her  honour  by  dollars  and 
cents.  If  her  flag  has  been  insulted — if  her  citizens 
have  been  unjustly  imprisoned  and  robbed — if  her 
territory  has  been  violated,  the  cost  of  redress  is  es- 
timated with  that  cold,  calculating,  mathematical 
code  so  unworthy  a  great  nation.  Like  some  nor- 
thern people  when  their  wives  or  daughters  have 
been  violated,  they  send  the  case  before  a  jury,  who 
estimate  their  honour  as  a  butcher  would  a  pound  of 
meat  in  market.  If  the  meat  be  choice,  the  price  is 
proportionately  high,  and  vice  versa  if  the  article  is 
poor.  We  feel  no  hesitation  in  believing  that  the 
honour  of  wives  and  daughters  is  in  far  better  keep- 
ing in  a  thimble  full  of  powder  and  one  ounce  of 
lead,  and  so,  likewise,  is  the  same  conservative  prin- 
ciple equally  applicable  to  national  honour. 

To-day  we  were  visited  by  several  friends,  who 
informed  us  they  learned  that  on  to-morrow  we 
would  be  removed  into  the  city ;  the  officer  of  the 
guard  also  informed  us  the  same ;  and  I  have  reason 


222  A    SPLENDID    VIEW. 

to  believe  that  such  was  the  intention  of  the  govern- 
ment, until  Mr.  Packenham  visited  us,  and  it  was 
ascertained  that  much  interest  was  manifested  by 
the  foreigners  on  our  account.  Then  we  were  sud- 
denly hurried  off  to  a  remote,  and,  as  the  govern- 
ment believed,  an  impregnable  fortress.  We  had 
the  precaution  to  send  our  original  "  articles  of  ca- 
pitulation," signed  by  General  Ampudia  at  Mier,  to 
the  American  minister  for  safe  keeping,  with  a  re- 
quest that  he  would  furnish  a  copy  to  the  minister 
at  war.  After  the  most  unnecessarily  wanton  and 
savage  treatment  of  us  by  Colonel  Terris,  of  the 
fourth  regiment  of  infantry,  we  represented  it  to  the 
minister  at  war,  and,  from  the  continued  favour 
which  we  learn  has  been  extended  to  him,  he  seems 
to  have  received  the  thanks  rather  than  the  rebuke 
of  his  government  therefor.  What  a  commentary 
upon  a  government  which  in  every  breath  speaks 
of  its  honour,  integrity,  and  magnanimity  I  The 
days  of  that  nation  must  be  numbered  whose  upu- 
nica  fides"  enters  into  her  most  sacred  obligations. 

Having  the  privilege  of  going  to  the  comun,  which 
is  in  the  second  story,  we  ascended  to  the  azotea  of 
the  palace,  from  which  we  had  a  splendid  view  of 
the  city,  Chapultepec,  the  snow-capped  volcanoes 
of  Popocatepetl  and  Istazihuatl,  and  the  whole 
valley  below,  and  a  more  charming  landscape  does 
not  exist. 


MARCHED    ON    FOOT.  223 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

MARCH  FROM  TACUBAYA  TO  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE. 

Marched  on  Foot. — General  Valencia,  Wife,  and  Daughters. — Our  Re- 
flections.— Hire  Asses. — Pulque-drinking  Officer. — Pass  the  Volcanoes. 
— Germans. — National  Character  of  the  Germans  and  other  Foreigners. 
— Puebla. — Bad  Treatment. — Lieutenant  Velarde. — New  Officer. — 
The  Execution  of  General  Mexier. — Acahita. — The  Death  of  Mexier. 
— Texian  Talent  for  Drawing. — The  Honest  Mexican. — Arrival  at  Pe- 
rote. — Meeting  our  Countrymen  Prisoners. 

March  18th.  At  ten  o'clock  A.M.,  when  we 
were  in  momentary  expectation  of  orders  to  march 
to  the  city,  a  company  of  cavalry  rode  up,  and  the 
officer  ordered  us  to  bundle  up  our  blankets  to 
march  to  the  Castle  of  Perote,  one  hundred  and 
sixty  miles  east  from  the  capital.  We  were  told  we 
would  be  furnished  no  horses,  mules,  or  asses.  We 
asked  if  we  could  have  the  privilege  of  hiring  some 
to  pack  our  blankets  and  sheepskins  upon,  and  was 
bluntly  answered  "  there  were  none  to  hire."  Up 
to  the  moment  of  starting  we  had  been  told  by  our 
officer  that  General  Valencia  and  family  would  be 
out  to  see  us  that  day ;  and  having  learned  that  they 
had  greatly  interested  themselves  the  year  previous 
for  our  Santa  Fe  prisoners,  we  felt  flattered  at  this 
information.  How  suddenly  our  fond  expectation 
was  changed  !  In  a  few  minutes  each  of  us  had  to 
roll  up  his  dirty  blanket  and  sheepskin,  take  them 
under  his  arm,  and  march  down  the  street  with  a 


224    MEET  GENERAL  VALENCIA  AND  FAMILY. 

file  of  mounted  lancers  on  each  hand.  We  had 
proceeded  but  a  few  hundred  yards  when  we  met 
the  splendid  equipage — a  Parisian  coach  and  United 
States  horses — of  General  Valencia,  with  himself, 
wife,  and  daughters.  They  were,  in  fact,  as  our  of- 
ficer informed  us,  upon  a  visit  to  the  archbishop,  it 
being  some  important  saint-day. 

From  the  manner  in  which  they  noticed  us  in 
passing,  they  seemed  to  know  that  we  were  Tex- 
ians.  This  they  may  have  easily  inferred,  both  from 
our  national  costume — for  we  were  too  national  to 
wear  anything  after  Mexican  fashion  when  we 
could  avoid  it — and  also  from  our  national  up-head 
appearance.  Freemen  carry  their  heads  higher 
than  subjects,  their  hearts  swell  larger,  and  they  are 
infinitely  more  proud. 

Just  at  this  time,  when  we  met  these  beautiful 
young  ladies — and  they  were  of  as  fair  complexion, 
dressed  as  fashionably,  and  looked  as  well  as  the 
best  of  our  country — we  felt  all  the  elements  of  dis- 
gust, contempt,  and  bitter  hostility  for  a  nation  so 
regardless  of  the  obligations  of  truth  and  good  faith. 
We  now  ascertained  to  our  satisfaction  that  Gen- 
eral Ampudia's  reiterated  and  gratuitous  promises 
to  us  were  either  made  in  bad  faith,  or  that  they  had 
been  wholly  disregarded  by  his  government ;  and 
when  we  passed  these  young  ladies,  whatever  may 
have  been  our  appearance,  we  felt  like  freemen, 
John  Rodgers  at  the  stake  could  not  have  felt 
more  independent :  we  gave  them  a  soldier's  salute. 


FEW    WHEEL    CARRIAGES    IN    MEXICO.  225 

and  staggered  on  with  our  sheepskin  bundles.  Thus 
we  trudged  on  half  a  -mile  farther,  when  the  heart 
of  our  officer  melted  within  him.  He  met  a  miser- 
able leper v,  leading  a  still  more  miserable  mule,  and 
permitted  us  to  give  four  prices  for  the  privilege  of 
packing  our  bundles  upon  the  poor  animal. 

Our  road  now  lay  east,  and  we  had  to  pass  through 
the  southern  suburbs  of  the  city.  In  coming  to  Tac- 
ubaya  we  passed  through  the  northern  and  west- 
ern confines  of  the  city,  and  now  we  were  making 
almost  a  circle  around  it  to  reach  the  great  stage- 
road  leading  to  Puebla.  When  we  reached  the 
southern  suburb  we  met  some  Peons  with  a  num- 
ber of  burros,  asses,  returning  from  the  city,  where 
they  had  been  packing  charcoal  to  market.  Our 
officer  here  discharged  the  leper o  and  his  mule,  and 
allowed  us  to  hire  some  burros. 

In  Mexico  they  have  but  few  wheel  carriages, 
and  everything  is  transported  upon  the  backs  of  an- 
imals. In  every  part  of  the  country  we  met  im- 
mense numbers  of  mules  and  asses  packed  with  ev- 
ery species  of  goods  which  constitutes  the  com- 
merce of  the  country.  The  mules  are  usually  fine. 
The  best  I  have  ever  seen,  either  in  Mexico  or  the 
United  States,  are  the  pack-mules  between  the  cap- 
ital and  Vera  Cruz  ;  and  what  surprised  us  is,  that 
both  the  horses  and  asses  which  produce  them  are 
small.  The  asses  particularly  are  small ;  we  do 
not  recollect  to  have  seen  one  which  would  have 
been  considered  a  second-rate  animal  in  Kentucky. 

Ff 


226  THE    APAREJO. HIRE    ASSES. 

Those  used  for  packing  by  the  poorer  class  of  peo- 
ple are  usually  about  the  size  of  a  badly-raised  year- 
ling of  the  cow  kind.  These  small  woolly  animals, 
with  hair  usually  as  long  as  one's  finger,  and  tre- 
mendous large  bodies,  and  having  no  bridles,  an 
aparejo,  a  kind  of  pack-saddle  upon  which  is  pack- 
ed all  kinds  of  produce,  wood,  charcoal,  fodder- 
stacks,  &c,  are  driven  to  market  in  large  droves. 
When  the  produce  is  disposed  of,  these  droves  of 
animals  are  driven  home  by  the  arriero,  muleteers. 

The  aparejo  is  a  large  sack,  made  of  the  fibres  of 
the  maguey,  and  stuffed  with  straw,  and  when  lash- 
ed upon  the  burro,  is  broad  and  flat  upon  the  top — 
too  much  so  to  straddle.  When  mounted,  we  sat 
with  our  feet  forward  of  the  sack,  like  boys  going 
to  mill;  and  all  the  eloquence  of  our  English  was 
lost  upon  the  long- eared  brutes,  for  they  would  nei- 
ther turn  to  the  right  or  left,  or  quicken  their  pace, 
but  huddle  together  as  close  as  the  sacks  would 
allow,  thereby  giving  us  the  better  opportunity  of 
cracking  our  jokes.  When  one  would  lag  behind, 
the  only  persuasion  he  was  sensible  to  was  a  sharp- 
pointed  stick  a  few  inches  long,  with  which  we 
would  prick  him  just  above  his  tail;  this  would 
drive  him  forward  into  a  little  shuffling  pace  to  over- 
take his  company. 

We  had  gone  but  a  few  miles  when  our  officer 
discharged  this  arriero  and  his  asses,  and  coming 
across  a  fresh  drove,  permitted  us  to  hire  others  at 
double  price.  Thus  were  we  swindled  three  times 
this  day  in  donkey-hire. 


PULQUE-DRINKING    OFFICER.  227 

This  officer  was  an  ignorant  man,  with  a  face  as 
red  as  cochineal,  and  exceedingly  fond  of  pulque. 
In  passing  a  pulque  woman,  we  had  only  to  flatter 
this  lieutenant  with  the  title  of  Capitan,  point  to  the 
pulque,  crook  our  elbow,  turn  our  little  finger  over 
the  thumb,  give  him,  at  the  same  time,  a  nod  of  the 
head,  with  a  confidential  kind  of  a  wink,  and  he  al- 
ways drew  up  his  horse  with,  Bueno,  serior — enough 
said,  sir.  Our  funny  asses  and  exhilarating  pulque 
put  us  all  in  better  humour.  We  spoke  of  the  beau- 
tiful Misses  Valencias  ;  we  agreed  that  they  were  as 
white,  dressed  as  fine,  and  looked  as  well  as  the  best 
in  the  white  settlements ;  and  all  said,  "  What  a  pity 
it  is  that  such  splendid-looking  ladies  should  live  in 
such  a  vile  community!"  This  conclusion  brought 
us  to  the  eight-league  stand,  where  we  were  quarter- 
ed for  the  night 

March  19th.  Early  this  morning  the  officer  had 
stopped  an  unladen  drove  of  pack-mules  going  in 
our  direction,  and  gave  us  all  the  privilege  of  riding 
this  day  at  fifty  cents  each,  though  our  ration  was 
only  twenty-five  cents.  To-day  we  crossed  the 
mountain,  leaving  the  volcanoes  Popocatepetl  and 
Istazihuatl  to  our  right,  and  descended  into  a  deep 
cove  to  a  stage-stand,  called  Rio  Frio,  ten  leagues 
where  we  were  halted  for  the  night.  The  stage- 
house  here  is  kept  by  a  kind-hearted  Frenchman 
and  lady,  who  gave  us  supper  at  a  low  price,  and 
the  good  woman  divided  all  her  husband's  old  clothes 
among  our  more  destitute  comrades.     Here  we  met 


228  NATIONAL    CHARACTERS. 

an  unpretending,  whole-souled  German,  a  blacksmith 
by  trade,  who  insisted  upon  giving  us  all  his  clothes 
except  what  he  had  on ;  and  when  our  pulque-drink- 
ing officer  refused  to  let  us  have  more  than  one  gourd 
full  of  vino  mascal,  because,  he  said,  it  would  make 
Texians  very  dangerous,  our  German  friend  told  him 
"  he  was  a  fool ;  that  Texians  had  stronger  heads, 
and  could  drink  ten  times  as  much  as  Mexicans,  and 
still  be  men."  This  German  philosophy  procured 
us  the  second  and  third  gourd  full  of  the  ethereal 
liquid,  and  all  hands  went  to  sleep  praising  the  Dutch 
nation. 

Of  all  nations,  we  found  the  Germans  the  most 
devoted  to  the  interest  of  their  fellow-countrymen 
in  prison  ;  next  to  them,  the  Scotch  ;  next,  the  Eng- 
lish; and  last,  our  own  Yankee  nation.  Mortifying 
as  this  acknowledgment  is  where  my  countrymen 
are  concerned,  truth  requires  me  to  say  it.  It  is 
true,  that  in  some  instances  we  have  met  a  whole- 
souled  countryman,  both  from  the  north  and  south 
of  our  Republic,  who  would  not  only  share  with  us 
his  purse,  but  his  blood.  Such  countrymen,  though 
few,  live  in  Mexico,  and  we  regret  most  sincerely 
that  we  would  do  them  a  disservice  by  specifying 
their  generosity  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  bulk 
of  our  countrymen  found  abroad,  and  especially  in 
that  country,  are  a  cold,  calculating  race ;  they  go 
abroad  for  the  purpose  of  accumulation ;  they  have 
no  sentiment,  beyond  such  miserable  lucre,  and  they 
would  permit  a  countryman  to  starve  in  a  foreign 


SAN    MARTIN. — PUEBLA.  229 

dungeon  just  as  they  would  at  their  own  doors. 
The  German  does  not  wait  to  make  the  per- 
sonal acquaintance  of  his  oppressed  countrymen : 
he  asks  their  number  in  distress — feeds  and  clothes 
them,  to  the  credit  of  their  nation.  Thus  will  also 
a  Scotchman  and  Englishman  do.  We  found  many 
generous  Frenchmen,  though  we  had  but  few  French 
prisoners.  The  old  proverb,  "When  you  cannot  say 
anything  good  of  your  household,  to  say  nothing," 
prevents  me  from  instancing  several  of  the  most  su- 
perlative meannesses  of  our  countrymen. 

March  20th.  This  morning  we  procured  some 
of  the  most  miserable  burros  we  have  seen,  and 
eight  leagues  brought  us  to  San  Martin,  a  consider- 
able village  in  a  broad,  cultivated,  and  well-watered 
plain.  At  this  place  our  red-faced  officer  and  guard 
returned  to  the  capital,  and  we  were  turned  over, 
March  21st,  to  two  lieutenants;  the  oldest  long,  lean, 
and  lank — a  dyspeptic-looking  man,  who  appeared 
always  hungry — a  fine  specimen  of  ill  nature  and 
low  breeding ;  the  other  quite  a  youth,  but  evident- 
ly the  son  of  a  gentleman :  he  was  well  bred,  and 
exceedingly  civil.  They  guarded  us  to  Puebla,  a 
large  city  ninety  miles  from  the  capital.  This  day 
we  marched  eight  leagues,  and  were  quartered  in  a 
horribly  filthy  room  in  a  cavalry  barracks.  We 
asked  our  long  lieutenant  to  "have  the  filth  remo- 
ved from  our  room — that  we  would  pay  the  soldiers 
for  so  doing ;"  he  replied  in  the  most  contemptuous 
manner  to  our  request,  when  an  exceedingly  genteel 


230  A    PERFECT    SAVAGE. 

officer  came  up  and  offered  his  services  to  us.  He 
ordered  the  room  to  be  policed,  and  desired  to  be 
useful  to  us.  We  could  not  fail  to  inquire  the  name 
of  an  officer  capable  of  such  unexpected  and  unso- 
licited kindness,  and  learned  that  he  was  Lieutenant 
Velarde,  and  was  much  pleased  to  find  that  he  spoke 
English.  He  apologized  in  a  handsome  manner  for 
the  want  of  civility  of  some  of  their  officers,  and 
said  that  "  they  had  never  travelled  out  of  Mexico, 
and  knew  little  of  the  customs  of  other  countries." 
March  22d,  we  were  placed  under  charge  of  a 
lieutenant  and  troop  of  cavalry.  This  officer  was 
the  most  perfect  savage  we  have  before  or  since 
met.  He  was  of  middle  size,  and  apparently  about 
thirty-five  years  of  age,  with  a  sombre  countenance, 
shrill,  cracked  voice,  and  eyes  red  with  the  dreams 
of  his  bloody  deeds.  His  name  I  failed  to  procure, 
but  understood  that  he  was  the  sergeant  who  com- 
manded the  firing-party  that  shot  the  brave  and 
lamented  General  Mexier,  and  for  which  act  Santa 
Anna  had  promoted  him  to  his  present  commission. 
His  very  gait  and  look  bespoke  assassination ;  he 
was  the  very  impersonation  of  a  murderer.  Soon 
after  daylight  we  were  ordered  by  him  to  pack  up 
and  start.  He  refused  to  let  us  hire  even  a  pack- 
mule,  and  we  had,  consequently,  to  leave  some  of 
our  luggage.  We  were  marched  through  the  city, 
and  attracted  as  much  attention  as  if  we  had  been 
a  caravan  of  monkeys.  One  of  our  prisoners,  Daniel 
D.  Henrie,  was  exceedingly  ill,  and  he  was  thrown 


REACH    ACAHITA.  231 

upon  a  mule  with  as  little  ceremony  as  if  he  had 
been  a  package  of  goods.  With  great  difficulty  he 
made  out  to  hold  on  to  the  mane  of  the  animal  for 
two  miles,  and  in  the  act  of  falling  was  caught  and 
laid  upon  the  ground.  I  told  the  officer  it  was  im- 
possible to  carry  him  in  that  condition,  when  he 
replied,  "  Let  him  die,  then  !"  The  word  die  had 
no  pleasant  sound  to  our  friend  Dan,  who  was  not 
so  far  gone  but  that  he  knew  its  meaning,  and  after 
giving  him  water,  we  lifted  him  upon  the  mule,  and 
one  walking  on  each  side  to  hold  him  on,  we  pro- 
ceeded on  our  march. 

At  three  leagues  this  officer  stopped  with  his 
woman,  who  was  accompanying  him  in  a  coach 
drawn  by  eight  mules,  to  breakfast.  He  refused  for 
us  even  to  have  pulque;  "for,"  said  he,  "it  will  get 
in  your  heads,  and  then  the  devil  will  be  to  pay."  At 
this  place  we  hired  some  miserable  poor  burros;  and 
Captain  Reese,  being  mounted  upon  the  most  indif- 
ferent, was  pricking  it  up  with  a  sharp  stick,  when 
the  owner  came  up,  and  attempted  forcibly  to  take 
the  stick  from  him.  The  captain  drew  back  and 
threatened  to  give  it  to  him,  when  our  red-eyed 
brute  of  an  officer  rode  up,  and  threatened  to  run 
Reese  through  with  his  sword  if  he  struck  him. 
Our  only  satisfaction  was  to  curse  him  in  the  best 
of  our  poor  Spanish.  This  night  we  reached  the 
small  town  of  Acahita,  at  nine  leagues,  where  Santa 
Anna  defeated  and  shot  the  brave  General  Mexier. 

We  cannot  pass  over  a  spot  so  sacred  to  liberty 


232  MEXIER   AND    SANTA  ANNA. 

without  paying  some  small  tribute  to  the  memory 
of  this  deceased  patriot. 

General  Mexier  was  strongly  devoted  to  the  lib- 
erty of  his  country,  and,  being  one  of  the  firmest 
adherents  to  the  free  Constitution  of  1824,  was  ban- 
ished the  country  by  Santa  Anna,  and  sought  an 
asylum  in  the  United  States,  where  he  remained 
several  months.  In  the  year  1835  he  raised  an  ex- 
pedition in  New-Orleans,  and  made  a  descent  upon 
Tampico,  where  he  was  defeated,  losing  a  consid- 
erable portion  of  his  force  in  killed  and  prisoners. 
Twenty-seven  of  these  unfortunate  prisoners  were 
afterward  shot  by  order  of  Santa  Anna.  General 
Mexier  escaped  the  misfortunes  of  the  day,  and 
again  reached  New-Orleans.  Subsequently  he  sail- 
ed with  more  success  against  Tampico,  that  place 
declaring  for  the  Constitution  of  1824.  At  this  time 
the  Governor  of  Puebla  invited  him  to  join  forces 
and  move  against  the  capital.  This  treachery  was 
concocted  between  Santa  Anna  and  the  latter;  and 
when  Mexier  reached  the  mountain  pass,  a  short 
distance  from  this  spot,  he  found  Santa  Anna  and 
his  legions  to  oppose  him.  He  made  a  determined 
resistance,  but  at  length  had  to  yield  to  superior 
numbers.  Santa  Anna  offered  him  his  life,  provided 
he  would  swear  allegiance  to  his  central  despotism. 
His  answer  was  worthy  of  Leonidas  himself:  "No, 
sir,"  said  he;  "I  will  oppose  you  as  long  as  I  have 
an  arm  to  strike  for  liberty."  Thus  fell  this  brave 
man,  whose  history  I  learned  from  an  intelligent 


SANTA    ANNA    CARICATURED.  233 

United  States  citizen  who  had  travelled  subsequent- 
ly in  Mexico. 

We  were  hungry  and  tired,  and  sent  out  to  a  me- 
son to  purchase  supper,  which  was  contracted  for  at 
twenty-five  cents  each  for  sixteen.  After  much  de- 
lay it  was  brought  into  our  prison,  about  enough  for 
three  hungry  men,  and  from  the  whispering  consulta- 
tions between  our  red-eyed  officer,  it  was  clear  that 
he  divided  our  four  dollars  with  the  sutler. 

Upon  the  walls  of  our  prison-room  we  found  in- 
scribed many  names  of  our  countrymen,  who  had 
preceded  us  in  the  Santa  Fe  Expedition.  In  this,  as 
well  as  in  many  other  prisons  upon  our  long  march, 
we  amused  ourselves  at  our  countrymen's  genius  for 
drawing.  The  "  magnanimous  nation"  suffered  when- 
ever they  could  procure  a  piece  of  charcoal  and  a 
white  wall.  In  all  the  caricatures  the  tyrant  Santa 
Anna  had  a  conspicuous  place.  At  one  time  they 
had  him  crouched  in  a  Texas  prairie,  hiding  from 
the  sons  of  freedom  ;  at  another  they  had  him  upon 
his  knees,  yielding  up  his  sword  with  a  most  peni- 
tential phiz  ;  and  again  they  had  him  stalking  forth 
upon  his  wooden  leg,  under  a  chapeau  extremely  lu- 
dicrous from  its  immense  size,  with  a  huge  sword, 
dictating  laws  to  his  enslaved  countrymen. 

March  23d.  This  morning  our  assassin-looking 
officer  had  us  badly  swindled  in  the  hire  of  some 
poverty-stricken  hurras,  she  asses.  Our  friend,  Dr. 
Shepherd,  happened  to  get  the  most  fiery  of  these 
animals,  which  seemed  to  be  known  to  our  guards ; 

Gg 


234  AN    HONEST    MEXICAN. 

and  when  he  was  mounted  upon  the  aparejo,  with- 
out stirrups  or  bridle,  and  not  suspecting  any  trick, 
one  of  the  fellows  speared  the  animal  behind,  which, 
with  a  sudden  flirt,  landed  the  doctor  in  the  dust, 
much  to  the  amusement  of  his  comrades.  He  jump- 
ed up  and  made  towards  the  fellow,  evidently  with 
the  intention  of  striking  him,  who  drew  out  of  his 
reach ;  and  though  our  brutal  officer  saw  the  whole 
transaction,  he  ordered  the  cavalry  man  to  run  him 
through  with  his  spear  if  he  touched  him.  We  were 
halted  for  the  night  at  a  small  village,  having  made 
seven  leagues. 

March  24th.  This  day  we  were  marched  ten 
leagues  to  a  small  town,  and  placed  under  charge  of 
a  tall,  dark-looking  officer,  who  treated  us  with  much 
kindness.  Here  my  companions  had  a  hearty  laugh 
at  my  expense.  We  sent  out  our  orderly  to  purchase 
something  to  eat :  the  fellow  had  hardly  turned  his 
back  before  the  sentinel  at  the  door  of  our  prison 
told  us  that  that  fellow  was  a  noted  rogue ;  that  he 
would  cheat  us  of  the  best  half  of  our  money ;  that 
it  was  a  great  pity  the  Mexican  officers  allowed  us 
gentlemen  prisoners  to  be  so  swindled  ;  that  in  a  few 
minutes  his  tour  of  guard  service  would  be  over, 
when  it  would  give  him  pleasure  to  wait  upon  us ; 
and  that  he  would  see  we  had  the  full  benefit  of  our 
purchase.  This  fellow  also  told  us  he  had  been  in 
the  United  States,  and  knew  the  difference  between 
a  gentleman  and  apillo.  During  this  speech,  the  fel- 
low looked  so  very  like  an  honest  man  that  I  hand- 


ARRIVAL    AT    THE    CASTLE    OF    PEROTE.  235 

ed  him  two  bits  as  a  premium  for  his  honesty,  he 
being  the  first  honest  soldier  I  had  seen  during  my 
long  march  in  Mexico.  All  my  companions  rejoiced 
in  the  opportunity  of  having  an  "  honest  man"  to  buy 
their  food,  gave  him  their  extra  bits,  and  this  was 
the  last  we  ever  saw  of  the  money  or  the  fellow. 

March  25th.  We  had  five  leagues  this  day  to 
march  before  reaching  the  Castle  of  Perote.  Upon 
our  arrival  at  the  village  of  Perote,  in  looking  north 
about  one  mile  we  could  see  the  massive  walls  of  the 
castle,  with  its  numerous  portholes  and  dark-mouthed 
artillery.  The  great  extent  of  ground  covered  by 
the  castle  wall  and  the  earthen  embankment  around 
the  outer  "  chevaux  de  frize"  gave  this  fortification  a 
low  appearance,  and,  at  first  sight,  we  were  not 
struck  with  the  magnitude  of  its  strength.  Upon 
nearer  approach,  in  making  our  way  through  its 
winding  entrance,  and  across  the  drawbridge  over 
the  great  moat,  thence  through  an  archway  into  the 
great  plaza,  fronting  the  governor's  quarters,  amid 
the  bugle's  blast  and  the  roll  of  drums,  the  din  of 
arms  and  the  clank  of  chains  opened  our  eyes  to 
the  reality  of  imprisonment,  and  showed  us  what 
abler  pens  than  mine  have  described  as  the  most  ap- 
proved fortification  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Here 
we  met,  in  rags  and  chains,  fifty  of  our  countrymen, 
who  had  been  kidnapped  from  their  homes  in  Texas, 
the  September  previous,  by  General  Woll.  There 
is  a  mutual  sympathy  in  misery  :  we  met  as  brothers, 
and  I  hope  and  believe  we  shall  live  and  die  as  such. 


236  THREE    DAYS     GRACE. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

IMPRISONMENT  IN  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE. 

Three  Days'  Grace  before  Ironed. — The  Castle. — Its  Strength. — Pres- 
ident Houston. — Orazabo. — Cofre  de  Perote. — Castle. — Its  Situation. — 
Climate. — Description. — Bexar  Prisoners. — Mexican  Culprits. — Theft. 
— Rape. — Murder. — The  Prisoner  who  killed  a  Priest  for  kissing  his 
Wife. — Prisons  of  the  Mier  Men. — Their  Treatment. — Ironed. — Mode 
of  breaking  off  the  Chains. — Tricking  the  Officers. — Santa  Anna  and 
the  Blacksmith. — "  Can't  come  it,  Judge  !" — Rations.— Ass's  Milk. — 
Our  Mess. — Cooking. — Best  Way  to  make  Coffee. — Ordered  to  Work. 
— Remonstrance  to  Minister  of  War. — To  the  Governor. — To  the  Uni- 
ted States  Minister. — Release  of  Judges  Jones,  Hutchinson,  and  Mav- 
erick.— Treason  of  Robinson  :  our  Denunciation  of — Anniversary  of 
the  21st  of  April. — Sentiments,  Songs,  Tecolote,  and  Old  Guts. 

There  is  a  mockery  in  many  things  in  Mexico, 
and  now  there  was  a  mock  mercy  by  way  of  three 
days'  grace  extended  to  us  before  our  chains  were 
riveted.  During  these  three  days  we  had  the  priv- 
ilege of  walking  about  in  certain  parts  of  the  castle 
in  the  daytime,  estimating  its  capacity,  military 
strength,  &c.  We  made  in  our  minds  many  esti- 
mates, and,  after  all,  came  to  the  conclusion  that, 
though  this  was  one  of  the  strongest  places  in  the 
world  before  the  improvement  of  the  combustible 
shot,  and  though  it  reflected  great  credit  upon  the 
military  genius  of  the  last  century,  yet  if  Captain 
Stockton  or  John  C.  Stevens  were  to  be  placed 
upon  a  certain  mountain  elevation  about  two  miles 
distant,  with  a  few  "  peace-makers"  pouring  into  it 
their  death-dealing  fulminators,  these  fellows  would 


SITUATION    OF    THE    CASTLE.  237 

run  out  of  this  place  as  soon  as  hot  water  would 
drive  rats  from  their  holes.  However,  public  ex- 
pectation requires  a  more  particular  description  of 
a  place  so  celebrated  in  the  history  of  the  Mexican 
Revolution,  and  still  more  so  from  its  being  the 
prison-house  of  the  best  spirits  of  our  country, 
where,  through  the  cold  neglect  and  vindictive  ha- 
tred of  their  own  president,  they  were  permitted  to 
dwindle  out  a  miserable  existence  in  chains  and 
slavery,  in  rags  and  hunger. 

Upon  the  north  of  this  fortification,  in  the  bottom 
of  the  great  ditch  which  surrounds  the  castle,  lie  the 
mortal  remains  of  many  of  the  best  men  of  our 
country,  cut  off  in  the  prime  of  life,  through  their 
country's  ingratitude  and  neglect.  No  !  let  me  not 
do  their  country  injustice ;  that  country,  when  we 
speak  of  her  citizens,  has  always  been  ready,  will- 
ing, and  able  to  supply  their  wants  as  well  as  to 
avenge  their  wrongs;  but  this  generous  spirit  has 
been  too  fatally  repressed  by  the  injurious  influence 
of  the  executive  chief,  reducing  their  country  to 
beggary.  Forbearing  as  are  the  people  of  Texas 
under  the  wrongs  and  usurpations  of  that  execu- 
tive, they  yet  possess  the  moral  elements,  as  well  as 
the  physical  power  of  self-government;  and  if  much 
forbearance  heretofore  has  marked  their  political 
career,  it  has  been  because  they  believed  it  better  to 
suffer  a  while  the  evils  that  time  and  their  invincible 
courage  could  alone  redress. 

The  mariner,  in  approaching  the  Mexican  coast 


238  TRUNK    OF    PEROTE. 

of  Vera  Cruz,  is  struck  with  the  sublime  magnifi- 
cence of  the  Volcano  of  Orazabo,  with  its  regular 
conical  peak  covered  with  perpetual  snow,  long  be- 
fore he  can  see  the  lower  lands.  Though  this 
mountain  is  one  hundred  miles  from  the  coast,  yet 
so  high  and  imposing  is  its  appearance,  it  looks  to 
be  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.  When  at  sea, 
off  Vera  Cruz,  in  casting  the  eye  northward,  the  next 
most  imposing  peak  is  the  Cofre  de  Perote  (Trunk 
of  Perote),  so  called  from  the  rock  upon  its  extreme 
summit  having  the  appearance  of  a  trunk.  This 
peak,  though  frequently  covered  with  snow,  is  not 
perpetually  snow-capped.  At  the  foot  of  this  mount- 
ain, upon  its  north,  and  in  a  narrow  valley,  which 
separates  it  from  another  high  mountain  still  north, 
is  situated  the  Castle  of  Perote.  Though  it  is  built 
in  a  valley,  apparently  low  from  the  extreme  height 
of  the  adjacent  mountains,  yet  it  is  about  seven 
thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Its  con- 
tiguity to  the  snow  mountains,  its  altitude,  its  posi- 
tion, such  as  the  sun  cannot  reach  but  a  few  hours 
in  the  day,  all  render  it  an  extremely  cold  place. 
The  castle  adjoining  this  mountain  pass,  as  you 
ascend  from  the  tierras  calientes,  the  hot  lands,  has 
ever  been  the  stronghold  in  Mexico  of  despotism  or 
liberty,  according  to  the  whims  of  its  inmates.  The 
range  of  its  artillery,  bounded  by  the  "  Trunk  of  Pe- 
rote" south,  and  the  Mount  of  Pizzaro  north,  occu- 
pies one  of  the  principal  doors  to  the  capital. 

The  castle  is  built  principally  of  the  volcanic 


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  CASTLE.        239 

pumice  stone,  a  dark,  honeycombed  cinder,  which 
was,  when  first  emitted  from  the  volcanoes,  in  a 
state  of  solution  by  heat,  but  which  has  since  be- 
come of  such  an  extremely  hard  character  that  it 
will  yield  only  by  degrees  to  the  hardest  steel.  The 
opposite  plate  is  a  ground-plan  of  the  fortification, 
drawn  from  recollection;  and  though  it  may  not  be 
mathematically  correct  in  all  its  proportions,  it  will 
give  the  reader  a  better  idea  of  it.  The  main  wall 
of  the  fortification  is  an  equilateral  quadrangle  of 
about  eight  hundred  feet  on  the  insides,  and  about 
sixty  feet  from  the  top  of  the  wall  to  the  bottom  of 
the  great  moat  on  the  outworks.  At  each  corner 
of  the  main  rampart  there  is  a  bastion,  extending 
outward,  whose  sides  form  an  obtuse  angle  to  the 
main  wall,  so  that  all  points  of  the  circle  may  be 
defended  by  guns  bearing  directly  upon  the  point 
assailed.  Around  the  main  wall  and  bastions  there 
is  a  moat,  about  twenty  feet  deep  and  two  hundred 
wide.  On  the  outside  of  the  moat  is  a  stone  wall, 
while  the  main  wall  of  the  castle  forms  its  inner 
side.  About  fifty  feet  beyond  the  outer  wall  of  the 
moat  is  a  chevaux  de  frize,  built  of  squared  cedar 
timbers  twelve  feet  long,  set  upright  in  the  ground : 
these  are  mortised  through  a  longitudinal  timber 
passing  half  their  length.  On  the  outside  of  this 
chevaux  de  frize  is  a  ditch  of  about  fourteen  feet  in 
width,  the  outer  embankment  of  which  is  elevated 
so  as  to  reach  nearly  to  its  top.  The  entire  works 
inside  of  this  ditch  are  said  to  contain  twenty-six 
acres  of  land. 


240  DESCRIPTION    OF    THE     CASTLE. 

From  the  bottom  of  the  moat  to  the  top  of  the 
principal  rampart  the  height  is  about  sixty  feet,  upon 
which  is  mounted  about  eighty  pieces  of  artillery, 
upon  a  flat  roof  seventy  feet  wide  by  the  whole  ex- 
tent of  the  wall.  This  flat  roof  is  supported  by 
arches,  adjoining  each  other,  twenty  feet  wide  by 
seventy  in  length,  and  each  one  opening  with  a 
door  upon  the  inside  of  the  castle.  These  arches, 
adjoining  each  other  and  extending  entirely  around 
the  square,  constitute  the  workshops,  storerooms, 
and  cells  of  the  prisoners.  These  cells  are  regu- 
larly numbered,  and  when  the  castle  was  completed 
in  1773,  Ferdinando  VII.  was  inscribed  over  each 
door  in  large  letters.  The  ruthless  hand  of  revolu- 
tion has  run  the  paint-brush  over  the  name,  though 
it  is  yet  discernible  through  the  painting.  Upon  the 
inner  side,  and  at  each  angle  of  the  fortification,  is 
a  broad  stairway  ascending  to  the  top.  These 
stairways  are  secured  by  strong  wooden  gates  about 
twelve  feet  high. 

Upon  the  inside  of  this  fortification,  and  sixty 
feet  between,  is  another  range  of  square  buildings, 
two  stories  high,  the  upper  apartments  of  which  are 
used  as  officers'  quarters,  soldiers'  barracks,  &c.  This 
building  opens  upon  a  centre  court,  which  is  reserv- 
ed for  the  military  parade.  The  courtyard  is  about 
five  hundred  feet  square,  paved  with  cement,  under- 
neath which  is  an  immense  water-tank,  containing 
many  millions  of  gallons,  supplied  by  a  subterrane- 
an stream  of  wrater  as  pure  as  ever  flowed  from  the 


BEXAR    PRISONERS.  241 

mountains:  connected  with  this  great  water-tank  are 
gates,  by  which,  we  were  told,  the  moat  may  be  flood- 
ed at  the  shortest  notice.  These  works  were  the  la- 
bour of  many  years ;  they  cost  many  millions  of  dol- 
lars ;  and  had  not  the  improvement  in  the  combusti- 
ble shot  formed  a  new  era  in  the  science  of  war,  it 
would  have  been  impregnable  to  assault. 

We  found  our  countrymen  of  Bexar  occupying 
two  of  these  long,  narrow,  dark  archways,  adjoin- 
ing each  other,  in  the  eastern  rampart  of  the  castle. 
These  arched  cells  are  twenty  feet  wide  by  seventy 
long,  with  a  door  opening  upon  the  inner  side  of 
the  castle,  and  a  loophole  at  the  extreme  end  of 
the  room,  four  by  twelve  inches,  and  widening 
through  a  wall  eight  feet  thick  to  about  two  feet 
on  the  inside.  When  the  doors  are  closed,  which 
usually  takes  place  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the 
prisoners  are  counted,  and  a  sentinel  placed  at  each 
door.  The  only  ray  of  light  admitted  into  this  dark 
abode  from  without  is  through  the  loophole  and  a 
narrow  grating  over  the  door.  The  archways  over 
head  are  fifteen  feet  thick,  which  support  the  ar- 
tillery, underneath  which  are  subterranean  water- 
works, magazines,  &c. 

Upon  the  left  of  our  Bexar  friends,  the  adjoining 
rooms  were  occupied  by  their  own  Mexican  chain- 
gang,  a  large  number  of  convicts  condemned  to  dif- 
ferent terms  of  service  for  every  species  of  crime. 
One  of  these  fellows  boasted  that  "it  was  the  fourth 
time  he  had  been  imprisoned  for  rape,  and  it  would 

Hh 


242  PENALTY  FOR   KILLING   A   PRIEST. 

not  be  the  last."  Another,  clapping  his  hand  upon 
his  breast,  said,  in  the  proudest  tone,  "  I  am  no  la- 
dron  (thief)  ;  I  am  placed  here  for  murder."  In 
Mexico  they  think  murder  more  honourable  than 
petit  larceny,  though  a  large  majority  of  them  would 
steal  the  value  of  a  pin.  The  most  genteel  man 
among  these  illustrious  convicts  was  in  for  killing  a 
priest  who  was  caught  kissing  his  wife.  This  fel- 
low I  often  pitied :  he  had  been  in  good  circum- 
stances, but  in  killing  a  priest,  such  was  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Church  that  all  his  money  could  not 
save  him.  He  was  brought  there  after  our  arrival, 
and  his  wife  followed  him  to  prison  with  a  devotion 
not  uncommon  among  Mexican  women.  He  was 
a  tall,  graceful  man,  about  thirty-five  years  of  age, 
and  his  keen  black  eye  and  Roman  nose  bespoke 
a  temper  fierce  as  a  lion :  nor  did  they  belie  him. 
His  first  act  in  chains  was  to  beat  one  of  the  turn- 
keys severely  for  treating  him  as  if  he  were  merely 
a  common  prisoner.  Almost  without  exception, 
these  culprits  are  sunk  so  low  in  human  degrada- 
tion, that  even  an  outline  of  their  crimes  and  modes 
of  life  would  be  incredible  to  those  who  had  never 
been  an  inmate  of  a  Mexican  prison.* 

*  Mr.  Myer,  in  his  late  work  upon  Mexico,  gives  the  following  graphic 
description  of  the  "  Accordada,"  one  of  the  public  prisons  in  Mexico, 
where  a  portion  of  our  prisoners  were  confined :  "  Passing  through," 
says  he,  "  several  iron  and  wood  barred  gates,  you  enter  a  lofty  corri- 
dor, running  around  a  quadrangular  courtyard,  in  the  centre  of  which 
beneath  is  a  fountain  of  troubled  water.  The  whole  of  this  area  is  filled 
with  human  beings  —  the  great  congress  of  Mexican  crime,  mixed  and 


PRISONS   OF   THE   MIER   MEN.  243 

In  the  next  room,  and  to  the  right  of  our  Bexar 
prisoners,  myself  and  fifteen  companions  of  the  Mier 
men  were  lodged.  At  6  o'clock  in  the  evening,  all 
the  prisoners  were  counted  and  turned  into  their 
respective  cells,  where  they  remained  until  6  the 
next  morning,  when  the  doors  were  again  opened. 
At  9  o'clock  we  were,  as  usual,  counted,  and  turned 
over  to  the  new  officer  of  the  guard,  at  which  time 
our  men  were  made  first  to  take  the  filth  out  of  the 
castle  in  handbarrows,  and  after  that  to  pack  in 
stone  and  sand  to  repair  the  fortification.  The 
stone  they  had  to  pack  from  over  a  mile  and  a  half 
from  the  mountain  ;  the  sand  a  shorter  distance. 
In  the  performance  of  this  labour,  our  men,  being 
chained  in  pairs  by  the  ankle  with  large  log  chains, 
and  only  about  four  feet  between  them,  had  to  walk 

mingling,  like  a  hill  of  busy  ants  swarming  from  their  sandy  caverns. 
Some  are  stripped  and  bathing  in  the  fountain  ;  some  are  fighting  in  a 
corner ;  some  making  baskets  in  another.  In  one  place,  a  crowd  is  gath- 
ered around  a  witty  story-teller,  relating  the  adventures  of  his  rascally 
life.  In  another,  a  group  is  engaged  in  weaving  with  a  handloom.  Rob- 
bers, murderers,  thieves,  ravishers,  felons  of  every  description,  and  vag- 
abonds of  every  aspect,  are  crammed  within  this  courtyard  ;  and,  almost 
free  from  discipline  or  moral  restraint,  form,  perhaps,  the  most  splendid 
school  of  misdemeanor  and  villany  on  the  American  Continent."  Mr, 
M.  adds,  "  I  did  not  see  the  prison  for  the  women,  but  I  am  told  it  is 
much  the  same  as  the  one  I  have  just  described." 

In  this  prison  was  confined  for  more  than  two  years  our  patriotic  fel- 
low-citizen, Colonel  Antonio  Navarro.  When  this  gentleman  was  visited 
by  Mr.  George  Van  Ness,  he  assured  Mr.  V.  that  he  never  left  the  small 
apartment  which,  by  courtesy  of  the  officers,  he  was  permitted  to  occu- 
py, for  fear  that  these  horrid  wretches  would  commit  upon  his  person  a 
most  unnatural  crime,  common  among  themselves,  but  never  heard  of 
among  the  English  or  their  descendants,  and  too  execrable  here  to  be 
named. 


244     IRONED  BY  ORDER  OF  "  OLD  GUTS." 

very  close  together,  and  on  each  hand  was  a  file  of 
guards  with  fixed  bayonets  to  keep  them  in  order. 

At  nine  o'clock  of  the  fourth  day  after  our  incar- 
ceration, the  Mier  men  were  ordered  to  stand  aside 
to  receive  their  chains,  a  full  ton  of  which  had  been 
brought  out  and  laid  in  a  heap,  with  a  correspond- 
ing quantity  of  cumbrous,  rudely-made  clevises  to  fit 
around  the  ankles.  Here  stood  the  fat  old  officer  in 
charge,  a  Captain  Gozeman,  who,  from  the  immense 
protuberance  of  his  abdominal  region,  our  boys  dub- 
bed "  Old  Guts."  This  genius  was  exceedingly  civ- 
il at  times.  He  desired  Fisher  and  myself  to  make 
choice  of  our  chain.  In  fact,  there  was  no  choice 
between  them,  the  lightest  weighing  about  twen- 
ty pounds ;  and  even  if  there  had  been  any  differ- 
ence, neither  of  us  was  in  a  temper  to  make  the 
choice.  I  felt  that  placing  those  irons  upon  me 
would  make  Mexico  greatly  my  debtor,  which  some 
day  I  would  cancel  with  a  most  usurious  per  cent- 
age.  We  held  forth  our  feet,  the  one  a  right,  and 
the  other  a  left  foot,  and  the  son  of  Vulcan  rivet- 
ed us  together  as  though  we  had  been  a  pair  of 
unbroken  oxen  just  being  introduced  to  the  yoke. 
It  is  the  habit  of  soldiers,  in  walking  together,  to  step 
at  the  same  time  with  their  right  foot,  and  then  with 
their  left.  These  chains  subverted  this  well-estab- 
lished and  strictly-observed  custom,  for  one  being 
chained  by  the  right,  and  the  other  by  the  left  ankle, 
those  even  and  odd  had  to  move  together,  or  they 
would  pay  the  penalty  by  a  severe  jerk.     Colonel 


MODE  OF  BREAKING  OUR  CHAINS.      245 

Fisher  and  myself  being  first  ironed,  we  laughed  at 
the  "jewelry,"  as  the  boys  called  the  chains,  but  it 
was  the  laugh  of  a  consuming  vengeance.  We 
thought,  with  King  Lear's  fool,  that  these  were 
"  cruel  garters  !  Horses  are  tied  by  the  heads,  dogs 
and  bears  by  the  neck,  monkeys  by  the  loins,  and 
men  by  the  legs."  We  started  to  our  cells,  but  the 
inconvenience  of  being  coupled  so  closely  together, 
and  our  un-Siamese  locomotion,  determined  us  to 
separate,  and,  upon  reaching  our  apartment,  we  look- 
ed out  for  the  means  of  breaking  so  large  a  chain. 
Texians  are  a  most  ingenious  people,  and  are  usu- 
ally equal  to  the  emergency.  We  soon  found  means 
to  accomplish  our  purpose. 

In  our  prison-room  lay  a  loose  stone,  about  one 
foot  across,  on  one  side  of  which  it  was  slightly 
concave.  In  the  room  we  also  found  a  six-pound 
cannon-shot.  We  sat  flat  upon  the  floor,  with  the 
stone  in  our  laps,  the  concave  side  up,  and  covered 
with  a  blanket  as  a  non-conductor  of  sound,  to  pre- 
vent the  alarm  of  the  sentinel  at  the  door ;  then 
placing  the  middle  link  of  the  chain  across  the  con- 
cave surface  of  the  stone,  and  another  fold  of  blank- 
et over  the  link,  we  commenced  hammering  upon 
it  until  it  came  to  fit  the  stone,  turning  it  over  and 
beating  it  back  until  it  also  fitted  the  other  side,  and 
thus,  after  twenty  turnings  of  the  link,  it  parted, 
leaving  each  about  five  feet  of  chain.  When  we 
had  occasion  to  leave  our  apartment,  we  would  take 
the  broken  ends  of  the  chain  in  the  same  hand,  and 


246  TRICKING    THE    OFFICERS. 

walk  past  the  officer  with  the  same  indifference  of 
manner  as  though  the  chain  were  not  parted. 

Our  companions,  in  turn,  were  all  ironed,  and 
many  were  the  devices  they  resorted  to  in  order  to 
free  themselves  from  their  chains  when  not  in  the 
presence  of  the  officers.  In  that  horribly  cold  place, 
sleeping  upon  the  cold  pavement,  and  with  the  still 
colder  iron  for  your  bedfellow,  is  no  very  enviable 
situation.  Some  would  bribe  the  blacksmith  to 
make  them  leaden  instead  of  iron  rivets,  which, 
when  blackened  with  charcoal,  had  much  the  ap- 
pearance of  iron,  while  they  could  be  easily  ta- 
ken out  or  reheaded.  One  medio  would  buy  a 
leaden  rivet ;  and  for  some  time  this  ruse  was  prac- 
tised. Frequently,  however,  when  the  officers  would 
suddenly  enter  our  cells,  they  would  find  our  com- 
rades without  chains,  and  as  suddenly  every  fellow 
would  jump  to  his  "jewelry,"  and  clamp  it  on  with 
a  magic  celerity  which  entirely  bewildered  the  senses 
of  the  officers,  and  then  as  suddenly  put  on  a  de- 
mure, inoffensive  countenance,  after  the  manner  of 
schoolboys  catting  up  their  juvenile  antics  upon  the 
sudden  appearance  of  the  pedagogue.  Our  old 
friend  with  the  large  corporation,  after  much  fretting 
about  our  not  wearing  the  "jewelry,"  told  the  gov- 
ernor "that  it  would  require  as  many  blacksmiths  to 
keep  us  ironed  as  there  were  Texians  in  the  castle." 

One  of  our  companions,  who  belonged  to  the 
Sante  Fe  prisoners,  the  year  previous  told  us  a  sim- 
ilar anecdote,  which  then  happened  in  the  city  of 


"  can't  come  it,  judge."  247 

Mexico.  Santa  Anna  sent  for  the  blacksmith,  and 
gave  him  a  severe  scolding  for  not  keeping  the 
chains  on  the  prisoners.  The  poor  smith,  trembling 
with  fear  in  his  mighty  presence,  replied,  "  I  know 
not  how  it  is,  sire  ;  I  place  the  best  and  largest  irons 
upon  them,  but  no  sooner  do  I  turn  my  head  than 
the  irons  will  be  laying  upon  the  ground,  and  they 
will  do  'just  so  at  me :  they  surely  must  be  kin  to 
the  devil." 

What  the  poor  smith  meant  by  "just  so,"  in  which 
he  suited  the  action  to  the  word,  was  the  "you-carit- 
come-it- Judge' '-motion — a  la  Kendall.  This  motion 
is  performed  in  the  following  scientific  manner,  to 
wit :  place  the  extreme  end  of  the  thumb  on  the  tip 
of  your  nose  ;  then  lock  the  little  finger  of  your  left 
hand  into  the  thumb  of  your  right,  and  with  the  four 
digits  of  the  said  right,  give  a  quivering  motion,  as 
if  you  were  performing  upon  the  piano  variations  to 
the  Battle  of  Prague ;  give  a  comical  wink,  and  pro- 
nounce the  talismanic  words,  "  You  can't  come  it, 
Judge"  and  you  have  it.  This  is  what  the  Mexi- 
cans cannot  comprehend;  and  you  see  them  fre- 
quently practising  it  at  one  another  with  as  imper- 
fect a  knowledge  of  its  meaning  as  a  Texian  has  of 
the  rationale  of  animal  magnetism. 

Respecting  our  rations,  they  were  such,  even  with- 
out labour,  as  would  hardly  have  kept  soul  and  body 
together.  We  fortunately  had  a  small  balance  of 
funds  still  by  us,  which  had  been  so  kindly  furnish- 
ed us  by  our  friend  J.  P.  Schatzell,  and  Mr.  Marks, 


248  DIVISION   OF   LABOUR. 

the  United  States  vice  consul  in  Matamoras.  So 
long  as  it  lasted,  our  room-mates  made  out  pretty 
well.  A  medio  each  of  lard,  onions,  and  red  pepper, 
cut  fine,  put  into  our  rations  of  poor  beef,  and  re- 
cooked  over  a  small  earthen  stove  of  charcoal,  made 
quite  a  savoury  meal  for  several.  We  also  purchased 
sugar  and  coffee,  and  every  day,  at  twelve  o'clock, 
from  the  milkman,  a  gallon  of  leche  de  hurra,  ass's 
milk.  When  we  had  the  means,  all  of  our  mess 
took  a  hand  at  cooking.  Our  old  sailing-master, 
Lyon,  did  the  outdoor  catering,  browned  the  coffee, 
and  superintended  its  grinding.  A  soldier's  wife 
would  grind  it  upon  a  flat  stone,  for  which  she 
would  receive  toll.  Daniel  Drake  Henrie,  of  whom 
we  shall  have  to  speak  more  hereafter,  usually  called 
Dan,  for  short,  sat  upon  the  stone  with  a  small  In- 
dian fan,  and  blew  the  coals,  while  he  sung  "Long, 
long  ago,"  and  the  "  Soldiers  Tear"  Colonel  Fisher 
would  hash  up  the  meat;  Captain  Reese  would 
stand  by  Dan,  spoon  in  hand,  and  stir  the  milk,  to 
keep  it  from  boiling  over ;  Lieutenant  Clark  would 
beat  up  the  peppers  and  peel  the  potatoes,  while  I 
would  cut  up  the  onions  and  mix  in  the  condiments. 
After  frequent  tastings,  when  I  would  pronounce  the 
thing  right,  all  hands  agreed  that  "this  was  the  very 
best  dish  we  had  yet  cooked."  Thus  a  keen  appe- 
tite made  each  last  dish  the  best.  Each  of  the  mess, 
like  artisans  in  a  pin  factory,  had  his  separate  office 
to  fulfil,  but  the  fulfilling  of  that  office  depended 
upon  his  first  washing  his  hands ;    for  as  yet  we 


BEST  WAY   TO   MAKE   COFFEE.  249 

were  not  so  accustomed  to  the  voracity  of  the  ver- 
min as  not  to  make  war  upon  them. 

The  hurra's  milk  is  very  far  superior  in  richness 
to  that  of  either  cow  or  goat;  and  the  following  re- 
cipe will  make  better  coffee  than  was  ever  made  in 
any  other  manner  by  the  best  cooks  in  Paris : 

Take  one  pint  of  ground  coffee,  after  being  well 
browned,  and  not  ground  too  fine  ;  mix  it  up  with 
the  white  of  two  hen's  eggs,  to  which  add  two 
quarts  of  good  water,  and  enough  loaf  sugar  to  make 
it  as  sweet  as  desirable  ;  boil  this  fifteen  minutes  ;  to 
which  add,  after  boiling  it  long  enough  to  take  off 
the  "  long-eared"  smell,  two  quarts  of  ass's  milk  : 
take  care  that  the  milk  does  not  burn. 

This  beverage,  prepared  in  this  manner,  is  so  de- 
licious, that  the  most  fastidious  will  forget  the  f  long- 
eared,"  comico  gravity  of  the  animal  which  produces 
it :  for  our  countrymen,  Colquhoun  and  Bradley, 
both  Virginian  epicures  in  coffee-drinking,  pro- 
nounced it  better  than  anything  they  had  tasted, 
"even  in  the  Old  Dominion." 

A  short  time  after  wre  were  ironed,  our  fat  friend 
very  politely  informed  us  we  must  prepare  to  go  to 
work.  We  very  politely  replied  that,  as  we  were 
Texian  officers,  we  would  do  no  such  thing.  He 
went  with  our  reply  to  the  governor,  when  Colonel 
Fisher  and  myself  addressed  the  following  letter  to 
the  minister  at  war : 

II 


250  LETTER    TO    THE    MINISTER    OF    WAR. 

"  Castle  of  Perote,  March  31,  1843. 
"  To  his  Excellency  General  Tornel,  ) 
Minister  of  War  and  Marine  ;         J 

"  Sir, — Having  seen  it  published  in  your  public 
journals  that  we  surrendered  at  '  discretion '  and 
judging,  from  the  treatment  we  have  received  since 
we  were  placed  under  the  charge  of  the  command- 
ant of  the  4th  regiment  of  infantry,  that  such  an 
impression  still  exists,  we  beg  most  respectfully  to 
enclose  to  your  excellency  a  copy  of  the  articles  of 
capitulation  entered  into  at  Mier  on  the  26th  of 
December  ultimo. 

"  Of  this  treatment  we  do  complain  as  violative 
of  the  pledged  faith  of  your  government,  and  highly 
abusive  of  her  '  generous  magnanimity.'  That  this 
complaint  may  not  appear  unfounded,  we  beg  to 
state,  that,  with  few  exceptions,  we  have  had  a  right 
to  complain ;  and  since  we  are  not  the  less  grateful 
for  good  than  sensible  of  bad  treatment,  wTe  enclose 
to  your  excellency,  as  we  have  nothing  to  disguise 
from  your  government,  a  full  copy  of  our  correspond- 
ence with  the  several  officers  under  whose  charge 
we  have  been. 

"  It  would,  indeed,  be  tedious,  and  perhaps  unprof- 
itable, to  enter  into  minute  details  of  the  treatment 
which  has  been,  and  still  is,  imposed  upon  us,  so 
completely  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  our  articles  of 
capitulation,  as  well  as  of  all  civilized  warfare,  and 
the  magnanimity  of  a  great  and  generous  nation. 
And  we  protest,  in  the  name  of  the  civilized  world, 
that  the  imposition  of  this  treatment  upon  us,   as 


LETTER    TO    THE    MINISTER    OF    WAR.  251 

subjects  of  a  l  revolted  province?  is  arbitrary,  and  not 
justified  by  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  Sev- 
en years  since  the  people  of  Texas  lost  the  charac- 
ter of  '  rebels  by  demonstrating  their  ability  to  main- 
tain themselves  as  a  nation,  and  have  been  so  recog- 
nised by  the  most  enlightened  nations  of  the  earth ; 
and  whatever  may  be  the  opinion  of  your  excellency 
upon  this  subject,  we  are  bound,  as  candid  and  hon- 
ourable men,  to  assure  you  that,  although  that  ability 
is  greatly  increased,  yet  the  people  of  Texas  are  not 
the  less  anxious  for  an  honourable  peace. 

"  The  unnatural  and  predatory  warfare  which 
for  several  years  past  has  been  carried  on  upon  the 
borders  of  our  respective  countries,  has  been  repro- 
bated by  the  most  intelligent  of  our  country. 

"  But  when  we  understood  that  your  government, 
last  summer,  declared  that  she  would  thereafter  con- 
duct the  war  upon  the  'principles  of  civilized  war- 
fare /' — and  the  invasion  of  Texas  by  General  Woll 
was  believed  to  be  in  accordance  with  that  declara- 
tion— the  undersigned  took  the  field  under  the  orders 
of  their  government.  The  consequence  is  well 
known  to  your  excellency.  We  met  General  Am- 
pudia's  division  in  honourable  combat,  and  while 
success  crowned  your  arms,  we  have  not  discredited 
our  own.  We  capitulated  under  the  most  solemn 
promises,  made  through  the  honourable  and  chival- 
rous General  Romolo  de  la  Vega  and  Colonels  Ca- 
rasco  and  Blanco ;  they  pledging  the  straps  upon 
their  shoulders  that  we  should  be  treated  '  with  all 


252  LETTER    TO    THE    MINISTER    OF    WAR. 

the  honours  of  prisoners  of  ivar?  To  add  greater 
assurance  to  this  promise,  one  of  the  fathers  of  your 
Church,  Padre  De  Lire,  the  priest  of  Comargo,  came 
forward  and  pledged  the  holy  Catholic  religion  for 
this  observance. 

"  Our  credulity  accepted  the  terms,  when  still  we 
possessed  means  of  resistance  ;  and  what  is  the  con- 
sequence 1  Let  these  dirty  prison  walls  and  the 
criminal's  fetters  that  now  bind  our  limbs  answer. 
We  refer  to  what  follows  of  our  remonstrance  with 
feelings  of  deep  mortification  and  shame,  not  for 
ourselves,  but  for  that  authority  which  adds  insult 
to  injury.  We  are  now  ordered  out  with  your  crimi- 
nals as  scavengers  of  nameless  filth.  There  is,  how- 
ever, a  limit  of  endurance,  beyond  which,  as  hum- 
ble representatives  of  our  own  country,  we  are  not 
permitted  to  go. 

"  We  furthermore  solemnly  protest,  that  if  peace 
with  Texas  be  desirable,  she  cannot,  with  honour 
to  herself,  in  any  possible  manner  entertain  the  ques- 
tion during  the  continuance  of  such  treatment. 
However,  it  is  not  for  the  undersigned  to  suggest 
to  your  excellency  the  impolitic  tendency  of  such 
treatment ;  of  its  injustice  the  whole  world  may 
judge. 

"  We  have  the  honour  to  be,  very  respectfully, 
your  excellency's  obedient  servants/' 

April  6th.  Our  corpulent  old  friend  returned  to 
our  prison,  and  said  that  he  had  positive  orders  from 


LETTER  TO  THE  GOVERNOR.         253 

the  governor  to  make  us  go  to  work.  Colonel  Fish- 
er, Captain  Reese,  and  Lieutenant  Clarke,  the  only 
Mier  officers  present,  pledged  themselves  to  me  that 
they  would  be  shot  down  sooner  than  submit  to  the 
order,  and  so  we  informed  him.  We  then  address- 
ed the  following  note  to  the  governor : 


To  his  Excellency  the  Goveror-general ) 


April  6th,  1843. 
T-general  i 
of  the  Castle  of  Perote. 

"  Sir, — We  have  been  ordered  out  by  your  offi- 
cers to  perform  unusual  and  degrading  labour.  In 
the  name  of  our  country  and  the  whole  civilized 
world,  we,  as  officers,  solemnly  protest  against  the 
imposition  of  this  degradation. 

"  We  farthermore  respectfully  protest,  that,  even 
were  we  willing  tamely  to  submit  to  such  a  dis- 
grace, for  the  honour  of  our  country  we  never 
would. 

"  We  herewith  enclose  your  excellency  a  copy  of 
our  articles  of  capitulation. 

"  Very  respectfully,  your  excellency's  obedient 
servants,"  &c. 

General  Durand,  governor  of  the  castle,  though  a 
weak,  is  not  a  bad  man.  Upon  the  receipt  of  this 
note,  he  sent  for  Colonel  Fisher  and  myself  to  his 
quarters,  to  argue  us  into  the  propriety  of  working, 
and  the  unavoidable  necessity  of  his  performing  his 
duty.  He  said  such  was  the  orders  of  his  govern- 
ment, and  he  had  no  alternative ;  that  we  were  not 
entitled  to  protection  under  our  articles  of  capitu- 


254  LETTER    TO    WADDY    THOMPSON. 

lation,  &c,  &c.  We  replied  that  such  a  declara- 
tion was  in  accordance  with  "  Mexican  magnanim- 
ity," but  that  "  we  knew  our  duty  to  our  country, 
and  nothing  should  drive  us  from  it."  He  said  then 
that  "  he  would  communicate  again  with  his  gov- 
ernment upon  the  subject."  This  day  I  addressed 
a  letter  to  the  United  States  minister,  from  which 
the  following  is  an  extract : 

"  To  his  Excellency  Waddy  Thompson,  ) 
United  States  Minister,  near  Mexico.    ) 

"  Sir, — It  is  for  him,  the  President  of  Mexico,  to 
do  me  justice,  or  exercise  cruelty  over  my  body  at 
his  sovereign  will.  I  ask  nothing  for  myself  which 
the  laws  of  civilized  warfare  do  not  guaranty  to  me, 
and  must  believe  that  upon  reflection  his  excellency 
will  concede  this  much,  not  only  for  myself,  but  my 
brave  companions  in  arms,  whom  the  fate  of  war 
has  made  prisoners  with  me. 

"  When  his  excellency  Mr.  Packenham,  the  Brit- 
ish minister,  visited  our  prison  near  the  city  of  Mex- 
ico, he  led  the  officers  to  believe  that  we  would 
have  our  parole  according  to  the  laws  of  civilized 
warfare;  instead  of  which,  we  have  been  treated 
with  every  species  of  indignity,  insult,  and,  in  some 
instances,  with  inhuman  cruelty. 

"At  present  we  are  occupying  a  filthy  prison, 
chained  together  with  cumbrous  log-chains,  lying 
upon  the  dirty  floor  for  a  bed,  and  ordered  about  by 
a  brutal  soldiery  as  if  we.  were  their  own  miserable 
Peons.     To-day  we  are  ordered  out  as  scavengers 


LETTER    TO    WADDY    THOMPSON.  255 

of  the  filth  of  this  whole  garrison,  and  are  told  that 
for  refusing  to  disgrace  ourselves  and  our  country 
by  a  tame  obedience  of  this  infamous  order,  we  will 
be  incarcerated  in  a  dungeon  in  solitary  confine- 
ment. Be  it  so ;  yet  the  duty  we  owe  respectively 
to  our  Creator,  country,  and  ourselves,  we  never  can 
abuse. 

"  Can  it  be  that  those  governments,  yours  among 
others,  which  have  formally  acknowledged  our  na- 
tionality, will  longer  permit  a  violation  of  those  laws 
which  are  common  to  the  whole  civilized  world  I 
We  hope  not ;  and  as  your  government  claims 
friendship  with  ours,  we  most  earnestly  trust  it  will 
not.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  grateful  for  the  in- 
terest which  your  excellency  has  manifested  towards 
us  as  kin  and  countrymen,  and  we  beg  to  tender 
you  our  warmest  acknowledgments  for  the  same  ;  at 
the  same  time,  we  solemnly  protest  that  the  open 
violation  of  this  law  is  no  less  an  insult  to  those  who 
claim  to  be  our  friends  than  it  is  upon  ourselves. 

"  With  considerations  of  the  highest  regard,  I  am 
your  excellency's  obedient  servant, 

"  Thomas  J.  Green." 

Time  passed  heavily,  and  though  we  were  repeat- 
edly told  that  we  must  go  to  work,  yet  the  order 
was  not  attempted  to  be  enforced  upon  us.  The 
balance  of  the  men,  with  the  exception  of  those  who 
had  been  excused,  from  inability  or  other  causes, 
were,  however,  compelled  to  work  in  the  manner 
before  described. 


256  THE  TRAITOR  ROBINSON. 

About  this  time  our  countrymen  the  Hon.  Wm. 
E.  Jones,  S.  A.  Maverick,  and  Judge  Hutchinson 
were  liberated,  through  the  intercession  of  General 
Thompson.  They  had  been  ordered  from  Perote 
to  Mexico,  where  they  were  delivered  over  to  Gen- 
eral Thompson,  and  now,  while  on  their  way  home, 
they  called  to  take  leave  of  us.  This  afforded  our 
companions  good  opportunity  to  write  home,  which 
many  eagerly  embraced. 

We  were  told  also  that  Judge  James  W.  Robin- 
son, one  of  the  Bexar  prisoners,  previous  to  our  ar- 
rival at  the  castle  had  opened  a  correspondence 
with  President  Santa  Anna,  in  which  he  represent- 
ed a  general  feeling  to  prevail  among  the  Texian 
prisoners,  as  well  as  in  Texas,  for  returning  back  to 
the  Mexican  fold ;  that  this  correspondence,  with  a 
promise  from  Robinson  to  use  his  utmost  endeav- 
ours to  accomplish  this  end,  had  procured  his  re- 
lease. So  far  as  Robinson's  falsehood  concerned 
himself,  his  companions  in  chains  were  perfectly 
willing  that  he  should  humbug  Santa  Anna  out  of 
his  liberty  ;  but  they  were  unwilling  to  be  under  the 
imputation  of  disloyalty  to  their  country  even  at  the 
price  of  their  liberty.  Many  wrote  letters  to  Texas, 
and  several  to  Santa  Anna,  denouncing  the  false- 
hood and  the  traitor. 

Up  to  this  time  we  had  been  five  months  from 
our  homes.  We  knew  but  little  of  what  was  going 
on  there,  and  that  little  obtained  through  the  news- 
papers.    It  was  of  the  most  melancholy  and  fore- 


GRIT    TO    THE    BONE.  257 

boding  character,  and  contained  in  President  Hous- 
ton's many  messages  and  proclamations,  the  last  of 
which  had  just  reached  us,  in  which  it  was  stated 
that  a  portion  of  our  country  was  in  a  state  of  civil 
war,  on  account  of  his  violent  attempt  to  remove 
the  public  archives  from  the  seat  of  government. 
No  wonder,  we  thought,  that  Santa  Anna  should 
believe  Robinson's  statement,  when  he  sawT  under 
the  sign  manual  of  our  own  president  such  evidence 
of  national  disruption.  He  therefore  concluded,  as 
did  many  intelligent  men  in  Mexico,  that  the  peo- 
ple of  Texas,  to  escape  from  such  a  state  of  anar- 
chy, would  cheerfully  return  to  the  Mexican  family. 

Had  we  been  as  little  acquainted  with  President 
Houston  and  his  habitual  disregard  for  truth,  such 
possibly  might  have  been  our  conclusion.  We  knew 
him  better ;  we  knew  the  people  of  Texas  better ; 
and  there  was  but  one  sentiment  with  our  fellow- 
prisoners,  which  was,  "  that  we  would  rather  rot  in 
these  walls,  ere  Texas,  by  any  act,  directly  or  indi- 
rectly, should  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Mex- 
ico, or  do  anything  on  our  account  which  would 
compromise  her  dignity  and  honour." 

The  following  extract  of  a  letter  which  I  address- 
ed to  the  United  States  minister  on  the  5th  of  April, 
will  show  the  feeling  which  possessed  every  Tex- 
ian,  whether  in  sickness  or  in  health,  in  chains  or 
rags  :  "  It  has  been  rumoured  here  that  James  W. 
Robinson  obtained  his  liberty  from  the  President  of 
Mexico  upon  a  promise  that  he  would  use  his  influ- 

Kk 


258         the  author's  chains  taken  off. 

ence  to  bring  Texas  back  into  the  Mexican  family. 
If  he  has  done  so,  he  has  lied  to  obtain  his  liberty. 
I  tell  you,  in  perfect  truth  and  candour,  that  it  is 
worth  his  life,  and  every  other  person's  in  Texas,  who 
will  dare  intimate  such  a  thing.  I  say  again,  that, 
notwithstanding  the  dolorous  forebodings  and  infa- 
mous slanders  of  our  country  by  our  drunken,  opium- 
eating  president,  Texas  is  much  stronger  than  ever, 
and  never  will  entertain  such  a  proposition." 

During  this  time,  when  not  presiding  as  chief  co- 
cinero  (cook),  much  of  my  time  was  employed  at  the 
desk,  which  I  had  erected  by  propping  up  an  old 
door  in  one  corner  of  the  prison.  Here  I  employed 
my  hours  in  writing  letters  both  to  Texas  and  the 
United  States,  and  in  keeping  up  a  correspondence 
with  General  Thompson,  the  American  minister,  who 
evinced  the  liveliest  interest  in  our  welfare. 

My  health  declined  so  much  on  account  of  the 
coldness  of  our  quarters  and  want  of  proper  food,  as 
well  as  the  chafing  of  the  mind  under  such  restraint 
— added  to  which,  the  bitter  mortification  at  what 
seemed  to  be  my  country's  neglect— that  the  chief 
surgeon  of  the  hospital  ordered  my  irons  to  be  re- 
moved. This  was  fortunate  both  for  Colonel  Fisher 
and  myself,  as  it  afforded  us  the  privilege  of  walk- 
ing about  the  castle  uncontrolled. 

The  anniversary  of  the  Texians'  triumph  over 
Santa  Anna  at  San  Jacinto  found  my  finances  re- 
duced to  the  last  extremity.  Was  this  day  to  be 
passed  in  silence,  though  the  wheel  of  Fortune  had 


A  JOLLIFICATION.  259 

placed  that  tyrant  at  the  top  and  ourselves  at  the 
bottom  1  No  !  And  though  I  might  have  never 
expected  to  own  another  ounce,  we  would  have  re- 
joiced in  our  country's  triumph ;  so  that  last  doub- 
loon was  devoted  to  our  country's  jubilee. 

We  purchased  seven  gallons  of  vino  mascal,  and 
as  many  of  ass's  milk,  thirty  dozen  eggs,  a  large 
loaf  of  sugar,  and  appropriated  all  our  cooking  uten- 
sils and  water  jars  to  the  compounding  of  egg-nog; 
and  such  egg-nog  as  never  before  was  seen  or  drank 
under  the  nineteenth  degree  of  north  latitude. 

Colonel  Fisher,  Captain  Reese,  and  Lieutenant 
Clarke  beat  up  the  eggs  ;  the  old  sailing-master, 
Lyon,  pounded  the  sugar,  which  operation  he  ac- 
companied with  one  of  his  best  "  yarns ;"  Dan  stood 
by,  and  was  peculiarly  eloquent  in  singing  his  fa- 
vourite ditties,  "Long,  long  ago"  and  the  " The  Sol- 
dier s  Tear"  while  I  presided  over  the  synthetical 
operation  of  stirring  in  the  requisite  ingredients. 
When  I  pronounced  it  right,  they  all  said,  "  It  is 
exactly  the  thing." 

We  went  around  to  the  prison  rooms,  and  sum- 
moned all  hands  to  attend  the  thanksgiving.  When 
these  noble  fellows  stood  round  the  bowl  in  rags, 
with  their  "jewelry"  riveted  upon  their  ankles, 
brought  up  and  tied  around  the  waist  with  a  cord 
h-anging  in  a  graceful  festoon  between  each  pair, 
the  sight  filled  my  heart  to  overflowing.  Though 
the  body  was  oppressed,  they  looked  like  caged 
lions,  and  every  face  bespoke  the  invincible  spirit 
of  a  freeman. 


260  TOASTS. 

"  Fill  jour  cups,  boys  !"  was  the  word ;  and  they 
did  fill  them,  for  many  had  not  tasted  "a  drop"  for 
months. 

"  The  day  we  celebrate,  and  the  liberty  of  our 
country  :"  three  cheers,  and  "  Will  you  come  to  the 
bower  ?" 

Drank  standing  and  uncovered  ;  they  had  neither 
seats  nor  hats.  All  hands  pronounced  it  better  than 
the  nectar  of  the  gods,  for  that  they  understood  to 
be  pure,  unmixed,  and  unadulterated  "mountain 
dew,"  while  this  had  the  "  body  ;"  for  while  the 
juice  of  the  agave  inspired  the  soul,  the  ass's  milk 
filled  the  stomach. 

"  Our  wives,  children,  and  sweethearts  :"  three 
cheers,  and  the  "  Soldier s  Tear"  from  Dan. 

"  A  fair  field,  and  no  more  white  flags :"  three 
cheers,  and  "Hail,  Columbia!" 

"  Old  Peg-leg,  and  his  yellow  nation :  we  owe 
thee  much :"  groans,  three  times  three. 

Thus  we  were  getting  along  swimmingly,  when 
our  liberty  shouts  rose  high  above  the  walls  of  the 
prison,  and  alarmed  our  keepers.  They  supposed 
that  we  intended  to  swallow  them  and  take  the 
castle.  When  our  fat  captain  came  round  with 
the  guard  to  know  the  cause  of  the  riot,  we  told 
him  it  was  a  mode  we  had  in  our  country  of  cele- 
brating our  saints'  days,  and  hoped  he  would  not 
disturb  us  in  our  mode  of  worship,  as  we  did  not 
disturb  him  in  his.  He  replied,  "Bueno,  sehor — 
Very  well,  sir,"  and  started,  when  we  gave  the 
wick  to  Trimble. 


TRIMBLE    THE    TECOLOTE  261 

Trimble,  poor  fellow!  has  since  paid  the  debt,  and 
in  the  prime  of  life  too,  which  many  of  our  best 
countrymen  have  also  paid,  and  which  the  best  men 
must  pay  for  the  want  of  bread,  caused  by  the  crim- 
inal and  treacherous  conduct  of  our  own  president, 
who  could  have  relieved  him  at  pleasure.  The  poor 
man  has  left  a  destitute  family  to  mourn  his  loss. 

Trimble  could  mimic  the  look  of  an  owl,  and  twist 
his  head,  and  whoop,  far  better  than  the  most  elo- 
quent owl  upon  the  great  Mississippi.  This  poor 
fellow,  thus  having  the  wink  at  the  time  that  the 
guards  came  up,  squared  himself,  rolled  his  eyes  en- 
tirely over  in  the  sockets,  twisted  his  head  "  clean 
round"  on  his  shoulders,  and  gave  a  whoop  that  beat 
the  best  of  owls. 

Our  burly  captain  turned  round,  frowned,  and 
then  hesitated  whether  to  be  mad  or  pleased,  whether 
to  laugh  or  swear ;  and,  after  a  moment's  hesitation, 
with  a  vacant  look,  he  burst  forth  in  an  exclamation* 
"  Tecolote,"  and  moved  on.  The  universal  roar  of 
laughter  from  our  companions  hurried  him  forward. 
"Tecolote"  in  native  Mexican  means  "screech-owl" 
and  thus  poor  Trimble  carried  the  soubriquet  to  his 
^rave. 


262  AGILITY    OF    "GUTS. 


CHAPTER  XVL 

IMPRISONMENT  IN  THE  CASTLE  OF  PEROTE.— Continued. 

Our  fat  friend. — Commissariat. — Statement  of  Rations. — Jake  upon  Cow- 
ology. — Snake-bitten  old  Cow. — Guts  in  Caricature.— Old  Limpy :  his 
Character.— Lousing. — Simeon  Glenn. — Louse-racing. — What  is  an  Old 
Soldier1? — How  to  select  the  Racers. — An  Argument  in  favour  of  Phre- 
nology.— General  Austin  in  the  Accordada. — The  Old  Sailing-master's 
Pipe. — Longing  for  Brandy. — Sutler,  Wife,  and  Daughter. — Shifts  to 
get  Brandy. — Surprise  of  Senorito. — The  Sergeant's  handsome  Wife. — 
Dan  :  his  "Soldier's  Tear." — A  United  States  Midshipman.^How  he 
avoided  Work. — A  Favourite. — "Long,  long  Ago." — His  Heresy  lost 
him  Favour. — His  intellectual  Improvement. — Mr.  Black,  United  States 
Consul. — Billy  Reese. — Shooting  of  Captain  Ewin  Cameron. — Remin- 
iscence of  Captain  Cameron. — George  B.  Crittenden. — 0.  Phelps. — 
Letter  to  President  Tyler. — Letters  from  United  States. — Letter  to  Mr. 
Calhoun. — Preparation  for  Emigration  to  Texas. 

Our  fat  old  guard  was  so  corpulent,  that,  when 
standing  still,  he  had  often  to  rear  back  to  preserve 
his  equilibrium,  on  which  occasions  his  abdominal 
prominence  formed  a  huge  semicircle  from  his  chin 
to  his  hip-joints.  When  moving  forward,  to  pre- 
serve his  balance,  his  epicurean  preponderance  im- 
pelled him  along  at  a  railroad  speed — a  kind  of  run- 
ning pace ;  and,  though  he  was  the  largest  man,  jet 
he  was  the  fastest  walker  in  the  castle.  When  he 
would  be  coming  round  in  the  direction  of  our  pris- 
ons, the  word  "  Guts,"  sung  out  by  some  wary  senti- 
nel, told  us  that  we  had  no  time  to  lose  in  adjust- 
ing our  "jewelry." 


THE    COMISARIO.  263 

If  any  department  of  the  Mexican  service  is  worse 
managed  than  the  pay  department,  it  is  the  commis- 
sariat ;  as  evidence  of  which  may  be  mentioned  the 
fact,  that  though  this  castle  is  considered  the  strong- 
hold of  the  powers  that  be,  yet,  with  the  exception 
of  water,  there  is  not  one  day's  rations  of  provisions 
in  it. 

The  government  nominally  allows  both  the  sol- 
dier and  the  prisoner  twenty-five  cents  per  diem  for 
rations.  This  amount  is  not  paid  to  the  prisoner, 
but,  as  a  matter  of  favouritism,  is  allowed  to  some 
officer  to  draw  and  furnish  the  rations.  From  ava- 
rice— for  none  but  the  avaricious  seek  such  offices — 
he  puts  the  poor  prisoner  upon  what  will  barely  sus- 
tain life,  and  frequently  it  falls  short  of  even  that. 

The  fat  man  referred  to  was  the  comisario,  who 
received  our  pay  and  furnished  the  rations ;  and  it 
would  be  difficult  to  imagine  any  human  being  more 
penurious.  He  had  lived  to  an  age  when  avarice 
absorbed  his  whole  soul ;  but  all  this  was  in  some 
degree  excusable  in  his  case,  as  he  had  three  daugh- 
ters to  support,  whose  proportions  at  this  present  wri- 
ting but  too  much  resembled  that  of  their  worthy 
sire. 

The  rations  of  the  Mexican  soldiers  are  not  sub- 
ject to  the  like  abuse  as  in  the  case  of  the  prisoners. 
The  former  have  officers  to  whom  they  can  com- 
plain to  prevent  such  outrageous  swindling,  while 
the  foreign  prisoner  is  insulted  in  his  complaints, 
and  unpitied  in  his  misery. 


264  STATEMENT    OF    RATIONS. 

The  estimate  of  the  cost  of  the  Texian  rations 
did  not  exceed  eight  cents  per  diem,  with  a  reserva- 
tion of  three  and  a  quarter  cents  per  day  from  the 
twenty-five,  making  forty-seven  cents  paid  over  to 
each  man  once  in  two  weeks  :  the  balance  was,  con- 
sequently, clear  gain  to  the  old  cormorant  referred  to. 

The  reader  may  form  some  estimate  of  the  quan- 
tity and  quality  of  our  food  from  the  following  state- 
ment, which  I  furnished  to  the  American  minister : 
"  7  o'clock  A.M.,  our  cook  brings  us  in  a  large  tin 
kettle  of  coffee, '  the  devil's  broth,'  to  wit :  13  ounces 
of  a  burnt  substance,  so  called,  boiled  in  about  five 
gallons  of  water,  and  two  and  a  half  pounds  of  brown 
sugar,  '  pilonci,'  a  fraction  over  a  half  pint  each. 
This  amount  is  also  served  us  at  5  o'clock  P.M. 
At  noon,  the  rations  about  four  days  out  of  each 
eight  are  sixty-two  pieces  of  beef,  chopped  up  with 
the  bone,  there  being  sixty-two  prisoners.  These 
pieces  average,  with  bone,  about  fourteen  ounces. 
The  beef  is  much  poorer  than  I  ever  imagined  would 
be  served  for  food  ;  much  worse,  generally,  than  is 
served  to  their  own  soldiers ;  in  some  instances,  too 
poor  to  walk,  the  animal  having  been  brought  in 
upon  hand-sticks.  These  sixty-two  chunks,  wholly 
destitute  of  anything  like  fat,  are  boiled  in  water  with 
six  ounces  oi?nanteca,  lard,  with  a  sufficiency  of  salt 
and  red  pepper.  At  the  same  time,  eleven  pounds 
of  good  rice  are  boiled  with  one  pound  of  lard,  and 
a  small  quantity  of  onions.  The  other  four  days  of 
the  eight  we  have  no  meat  of  any  kind,  the  lack  of 


BEEF    FOR    THE    TEXIANS.  265 

which  is  supplied  either  by  Irish  potatoes,  oxfrijoles, 
beans,  which  last  are  most  generally  of  an  indiffer- 
ent quality,  and  not  sufficient  for  any  except  the  very 
smallest  eaters." 

After  we  left  the  valley  of  the  Rio  Grande,  we 
saw  no  beef  that  would  be  considered  even  tolera- 
ble in  Texas.  About  Perote  it  is  much  inferior  to 
any  we  found  elsewhere.  These  poorest  of  poor 
cattle,  whose  years  of  service  had  long  since  passed, 
had  been  turned  upon  the  common  to  die  ;  they, 
consequently,  could  be  purchased  cheap.  These  sup- 
plied the  beef  upon  which  the  ill-fated  Texians  had 
to  feast  themselves.  What  rendered  the  beef  the 
more  intolerable  was,  that  the  night  previous  to  the 
morning  on  which  they  were  butchered,  these  poor 
old  grandmothers  wrere  brought  into  the  castle,  and 
tied  to  a  certain  post  at  our  prison  door,  where  we 
could  all  see  and  pity  them.  Our  boys  would  gather 
round  these  poor  old  creatures,  count  the  rings  upon 
their  horns,  and  ascertain  their  years  accordingly. 
One  of  the  animals  numbered  seventeen  rings :  she 
was  nearly  blind  from  age,  and  would  roll  her  glassy 
eyeballs  around  upon  her  heathen  spectators  with 
the  demure  and  quiet  gravity  of  appeal  as  to  what 
the  strange  procedure  portended.  Jake,  a  heretic 
brave,  who  has  followed  cattle  long  upon  the  Tex- 
ian  prairies,  and  was  deeply  versed  in  cow-ology, 
knew  well  her  meaning.  Though  Jake  had  killed 
his  score  of  Mexicans  with  less  compunction  of  con- 
science than  if  they  had  been  so  many  vipers,  he  was 

Ll 


266  A    SNAKE-BITTEN    COW. 

deeply  affected  ;  his  heart  swelled  with  emotion, 
till,  with  a  choked  utterance,  he  turned  from  the 
scene,  exclaiming,  "  Boys,  she  looks  so  much  like 
my  poor  old  grandmother  in  Texas,  I'll  be  sworn  if 
I  taste  a  mouthful  of  her!" 

On  another  occasion,  when  one  of  these  venera- 
ble mothers  had  laid  herself  down  to  die,  having 
been  snake-bitten  on  the  neck,  which  caused  a 
swelling  even  to  a  larger  size  than  her  body,  and 
rendered  the  poor  creature  wholly  unable  to  stand 
upon  her  feet,  she  was  in  that  condition  packed 
into  the  castle  upon  hand-sticks.  In  remonstrating 
against  such  an  atrocity,  the  only  satisfaction  we 
obtained  was  a  surly  reply  ;  for,  after  the  old  fel- 
low had  reared  back  into  one  of  his  semicircle  at- 
titudes, in  a  most  complacent  manner,  after  a  deep 
and  thoughtful  look,  with  his  right  hand  upon  his 
chin,  and  his  fore  finger  pointing  up  above  his 
mouth,  he  said,  "  Well,  I'll  not  give  you  the  snake- 
bitten  part." 

We  had  our  revenge  upon  this  old  brute  by  car- 
icaturing him  upon  the  castle  walls,  to  the  great 
amusement  of  his  brother  officers.  We  had  a  pris- 
oner with  us,  a  German,  by  the  name  of  Voos, 
about  whom  a  book  of  stirring  incidents  might  be 
written.  Voos  was  the  man  who,  in  1835,  fresh 
from  Germany,  and  on  his  way  to  join  our  liberty 
army,  rode  smack  into  San  Antonia  when  the  Tex- 
ians  lay  before  that  place,  and  asked  for  the  Texian 
general's  headquarters,  when  he  was  shown  into 


"  guts"  caricatured.  267 

the  calaboose  by  General  Coss;  he  was  subsequent- 
ly taken  prisoner  with  Colonel  Fannin,  and  escaped 
that  horrible  massacre  by  passing  himself  off  as  a 
physician,  being  retained  to  heal  the  wounded.  He 
has  since  seen  a  great  deal  of  frontier  service,  and 
been  in  many  Indian  fights  :  he  is  a  man  of  educa- 
tion, and  has  fine  taste  for  drawing.  Upon  the  sun- 
shiny side  of  the  walls  of  our  prison,  Voos,  with 
charcoal,  could  give  a  lifelike  sketch  of  the  corpu- 
lent individual  so  frequently  referred  to.  On  one 
occasion  he  made  him  fishing  up  the  beef's  bowels 
from  our  cook's  kettle  upon  a  flesh-fork,  saying, 
"  These  are  very  good  guts,  Texians"  The  likeness 
was  so  good  that  all  the  Mexican  officers  recognised 
it,  and  the  more  they  laughed,  the  more  towering 
Guts's  passion  rose,  until  serious  fears  were  entertain- 
ed of  an  explosion  of  his  ire. 

He  was  too  much  absorbed  with  avarice,  howev- 
er, to  be  greatly  disturbed  by  any  other  passion  ;  and 
had  his  senior  officer  been  a  better  man,  perhaps  Guts 
would  have  been  a  kinder  master.  This  senior  of- 
ficer, who  watched  him  so  closely  that  he  had  to 
watch  us  with  like  diligence,  was  the  Mayor  de  la 
Plaza,  and  next  in  command  to  the  governor. 

When  Admiral  Baudin  turned  loose  his  French 
crackers  upon  them  at  Vera  Cruz  in  1838,  it  is  said 
that  this  officer,  in  scampering  out  of  danger,  ran 
against  a  stone  corner  and  knocked  off  his  knee-pan, 
from  which  his  leg  has  never  since  straightened. 
He  walks  with  a  staff,  and  upon  the  tip  ends  of  his 


268  OLD    "  LIMPY." LOUSING. 

toes,  which  gives  him  a  gait  uneven  as  that  of  the 
kangaroo.  This  old  chap,  whose  temper,  if  possi- 
ble, is  more  uneven  than  his  gait,  and  whose  moth- 
er entailed  upon  him  the  misery  of  a  name  that 
Texians  never  could  pronounce,  for  short  we  called 
"  Old  Limpy."  If  we  met  worse  men  in  Mexico, 
we  certainly  never  met  so  mean  a  wretch  as  "  Lim- 
py." He  would  slip  round  the  corners,  and  take  all 
the  low,  eaves-dropping  turns  upon  us  of  a  mean  ne- 
gro. He  would,  by  every  means  in  his  power,  en- 
deavour to  curtail  our  liberties  and  comforts,  the 
greatest  of  which  was,  after  a  cold  night,  to  get  on 
the  sunshiny  side  of  the  wall  and  kill  the  vermin. 

This  operation  in  Mexico  occupies  a  large  por- 
tion of  the  daylight  of  that  nation  ;  and  I  am  told 
that  from  long  habit,  vermin-killing  is  almost  as  ne- 
cessary an  excitement  to  the  vitality  of  this  race  as 
bread  and  meat  is  to  ours.  "  There  were  lice  upon 
man  and  beast,"  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine 
that  there  could  be  a  greater  number  in  the  coun- 
try, even  had  the  dust  of  the  earth  been  "  smote  with 
the  rod  of  Aaron." 

There  were  certain  hours  between  the  opening 
of  our  prison  doors  and  the  "  turning  off  of  the 
guard,"  when  our  men  would  seek  the  sunshine, 
spread  out  their  blankets,  and  down  upon  their  all- 
fours,  not  to  hunt  the  vermin  as  a  matter  of  amuse- 
ment, but  to  make  upon  them  flagrante  hello.  The 
rays  of  the  sun  would  start  these  night-walkers  from 
their  hiding-places,  and  their  motion  would  make 


"  DRIVING." SIMEON    GLENN.  269 

them  the  more  easily  seen.  The  Texians,  for  de- 
cency's sake,  called  this  operation  "  driving :"  nor 
did  they  ever  drive  in  vain.  At  times,  when  one 
of  these  animals  showed  himself  particularly  fleet 
of  foot,  he  would  be  captured  and  saved  for  the 
races.  How  greatly  does  early  education  influence 
our  lives  !  the  early  prejudice  against  crushing  this 
hideous  insect  between  the  thumb  nails  always  op- 
erated adversely  upon  my  appetite  ;  and  I  do  con- 
fess that  I  can  maintain  a  better  stomach  at  the 
killing  of  a  Mexican  than  at  the  killing  of  one  of 
these  prison-associates  after  the  above  manner. 
Though  I  frequently  scalded  and  swept  my  "  3  by 
6"  sleeping-place,  and  changed  my  clothes  almost 
every  day,  yet,  upon  an  average,  each  morning  I 
would  have  from  thirty  to  forty  of  these  provoking 
bedfellows  upon  me.  In  one  thinglwas  peculiarly 
fortunate. 

In  the  same  prison-cell  with  me  was  Simeon 
Glenn,  one  of  my  "old  '36  brigade."  He  felt  all 
the  attachment  for  me  which  an  old  soldier  feels  for 
his  superior  officer,  and  volunteered  to  do  a  service 
which  was  calculated  to  shorten  my  breakfast. 
Simeon  was  a  good  fellow  and  an  old  soldier  in 
more  than  one  sense.  When  he  was  first  ordered 
out  to  work,  he  told  our  sentinel  that  he  had  the 
hernia,  and  that  the  American  doctors  told  him 
"  never  to  stoop  down  and  lift  up  anything."  This 
was  sufficient,  as  the  opinion  of  American  doctors 
was  regarded  as  of  the  highest  authority  in  all  hu- 


270  LOUSE    RACING. 

man  maladies,  and  Simeon  was  permitted  to  remain 
in  prison.  This  indulgence  afforded  him  ample  op- 
portunity to  war  ad  libitum  upon  the  piojo.  Most 
of  the  time  since  1836  Simeon  had  lived  with  the 
Mexican  population  of  Bexar;  and  while  his  resi- 
dence did  not  make  him  the  better  friend  of  the 
Mexican,  it  confirmed  his  decided  hostility  against 
these  vermin. 

The  first  thing  in  the  morning  after  the  turnkey 
would  open  our  prison  door  and  let  in  the  light,  I 
would  get  up  and  call  for  Simeon.  I  generally  pre- 
faced handing  him  the  shirt  by  saying,  "  Glenn,  I 
had  a  very  disagreeable  night  of  it."  Taking  the 
shirt,  Simeon's  sympathy  would  as  often  respond, 
after  turning  down  a  plait  in  the  collar,  "  No  won- 
der, general !  look  here  at  this  cursed  old  sow  with 
her  litter  of  pigs  !" 

Simeon  lost  nothing  by  this  operation,  for  he 
usually  came  in  as  one  of  our  mess ;  and  when  he 
assisted  as  cook,  it  was  not  until  the  formal  procla- 
mation of  the  irrevocable  law  of  "soap  and  water :" 
no  law  of  the  Medes  or  Persians  was  ever  more 
strictly  enforced  when  we  had  anything  to  cook. 

This  very  delicate  pursuit  of  louse  racing  has  long 
since  been  known  in  Mexican  prisons  as  one  of  the 
very  few  amusements  of  those  dull  regions.  The 
races  come  off  in  the  following  manner :  The  Mex- 
ican prisoners  draw  a  circle  upon  a  beefs  hide 
about  eighteen  inches  in  diameter,  inside  of  which 
they  draw  a  smaller  one,  and  in  the  centre  of  this 


LOUSE   RACING.  271 

they  make  a  holy  cross :  even  to  this  vile  purpose  is 
that  emblem  of  purity  prostituted  !  The  racers  are 
placed  on  the  outside  of  the  inner  ring,  and  the  one 
that  first  crosses  the  double  ring,  and  arrives  at  the 
holy  goal,  sweeps  the  plata  or  soap,  as  the  case  may 
be.  We  have  witnessed  the  most  ludicrous  scenes 
around  these  pools. 

As  the  tiny  animals  start,  their  owners  become 
as  much  excited,  doubtless,  as  the  owners  of  Fash- 
ion and  Boston  at  their  great  race.  They  jump 
and  climb  over  each  other  to  get  a  better  view  :  it 
is,  "Hurra  for  the  white,"  and  "Well  done  for  the 
red,"  and  many  such  expressions,  accompanied  with 
the  most  antic  capers,  each  countenance  being  ex- 
pressive of  different  degrees  of  hope  and  despair, 
according  to  the  locality  of  their  respective  coursers. 
On  these  funny  occasions,  we  have  stood  off  to 
watch  the  countenances  of  the  parties  interested, 
and  have  witnessed  grimaces  which  would  have 
shaken  the  pencil  from  the  hands  of  Hogarth.  The 
only  thing  comparable  to  it  is  the  negroes  around  a 
cockpit  on  a  Whitsuntide  in  Virginia  or  North  Car- 
olina, a  festival  of  ancient  fashion  in  those  good  old 
states,  where  the  negroes  are  as  free  of  constraint 
as  were  the  slaves  of  Rome  on  their  Saturnalia. 

The  Texian  prisoners  thus  simplified  this  mode 
of  racing  :  they  drew  a  charcoal  circle  upon  a  plank, 
in  the  centre  of  which  the  racers  are  turned  loose 
at  a  given  signal,  and  the  one  that  "  first  crosses  the 
black  ring  is  winner." 


272  WHAT    IS    AN    OLD    SOLDIER  I 

Soon  after  pay-days,  when  each  man  is  flush  with 
his  forty-seven  cents  in  cash,  I  have  known  a  whole 
"  medio"  bet  upon  a  race  ;  but  the  most  usual  bet 
was  an  old  soldier.  An  "  old  soldier"  in  this  sense 
is  not  the  absolute  war-worn  veteran,  covered  with 
honourable  scars  and  long  years  of  service,  but  a 
chew  of  tobacco,  which  has  from  time  to  time  un- 
dergone mastication  from  friend  to  friend,  with  the 
same  kindness  which  one  would  loan  another  his 
knife  or  comb.  These  "old  soldiers,"  after  losing 
all  the  virtues  of  the  "weed"  from  long  grinding,  are 
dried  and  smoked  in  a  pipe ;  the  latter  operation 
coming  as  near  the  idea  of  the  destructibility  of  mat- 
ter as  philosophical  analysis  will  allow. 

There  is  much  skill  to  be  exercised  in  the  selec- 
tion of  your  racers.  At  the  same  time  that  you 
would  avoid  the  selection  of  an  epicurean-built  an- 
imal as  you  w7ould  an  overly  fat  horse,  it  is  not  al- 
ways that  the  most  Cassius-looking  fellow  will  win. 
Those  who  had  watched  more  closely  the  natu- 
ral history  of  the  animal,  soon  discovered  that  they 
have  as  much  love  for  their  young  as  animals  of  a 
larger  size.  Thus  those  of  our  countrymen  most 
skilled  in  the  zoology  of  this  troublesome  little  crea- 
ture won  the  most  "  old  soldiers."  They  would 
select  a  mother,  which  had  lately  deposited  her 
young,  around  which  she  would  hover  with  the  de- 
votion of  a  hen  over  her  brood.  When  the  mother 
of  the  young  family  was  turned  loose,  her  philopro- 
genitiveness  impelled  her  forth,  and  doubtless  she 


AN  ARGUMENT   IN   FAVOUR   OF   PHRENOLOGY.     273 

felt  all  the  keen,  though  instinctive  anxiety  for  her 
offspring  which  wiser  animals  feel.  Whether  her 
organ  of  locality  could  safely  direct  her  back  to  her 
household  after  such  abduction  is  more  than  was 
ascertained.  This  is  certain,  that  she  usually  reach- 
ed the  goal  first.  Had  Pindar  been  an  inmate  of  a 
Mexican  prison,  he  would  have  enriched  his  "  Lous- 
iad"  with  a  more  accurate  knowledge  of  his  subject. 
And  might  not  Mr.  Combe,  or  some  other  phrenol- 
ogist, strengthen  their  theory  by  subjecting  the  head 
of  a  mother  louse  to  microscopic  inspection  1  Or, 
would  it  be  a  strong  argument  in  favour  of  this  fas- 
cinating science  should  the  bump  of  philoprogeni- 
tiveness  be  larger  in  a  louse  than  in  a  flea  1  for  the 
latter  deposites  her  young  and  hops  off  with  all  the 
ball-room  gayety  of  a  coquette,  leaving  the  "  little 
ones"  to  make  the  best  of  their  way  into  the  world. 
The  lamented  General  Austin  once  told  me,  that 
when  he,  by  order  of  Santa  Anna,  was  so  long  incar- 
cerated in  the  Accordada  in  solitary  confinement,  a 
mouse  was  his  only  companion  ;  and  that  it  be- 
came so  very  gentle  as  to  feed  from  his  hands. 
Until  I  witnessed  the  interest  which  prisoners  take 
in  smaller  things,  I  could  not  realize  that  interest 
which,  he  assured  me,  in  the  absence  of  man  or  books, 
he  took  in  his  little  companion.  "  Often,"  said  he, 
"when  reason  was  nearly  dethroned,  and  hope  sunk 
into  despair,  this  little  animal  would  come  as  a  spe- 
cial messenger  sent  by  Providence  to  recall  my  sen- 
ses ;  and — would  you  believe  it  1 — I  have  laughed  at 

M  M 


274  FORCE    OF    HABIT. 

his  antic  miniature  comedies,  and  talked  to  him  for 
hours." 

Lord  Byron  makes  the  prisoner  of  Chillon  thus 
beautifully  express  this  feeling,  and  it  has  in  it  even 
more  truth  than  poetry : 

"  With  spiders  I  have  friendship  made, 
And  watch 'd  them  in  their  sullen  trade  ; 
Had  seen  the  mice  by  moonlight  play, 
And  why  should  I  feel  less  than  they  1 
We  were  all  inmates  of  one  place, 
And  I  the  monarch  of  each  race  ; 
Had  power  to  kill— yet,  strange  to  tell ! 
In  quiet  we  had  learned  to  dwell : 
My  very  chains  and  I  grew  friends. 
So  much  a  long  communion  tends 
To  make  us  what  we  are." 

It  is  constitutional  with  mankind  that  his  desire 
increases  for  the  thing  inhibited  to  him.  I  have  seen 
many  striking  illustrations  of  this  fact.  I  have  known 
men  who  could  well  do  without  tobacco  where  it 
was  plenty,  but  when  they  could  not  get  it  would 
long  for  it  with  the  intense  feeling  of  a  woman  for 
some  particular  fancy  when  in  the  most  interesting 
state  of  nature.  I  have  known  men  who  rarely  or 
never  drank  ardent  spirits  when  it  was  easily  to  be 
had,  so  soon  as  the  use  of  it  was  denied  them,  they 
would  put  themselves  to  the  greatest  possible  shifts 
to  procure  it.  Above  all  others,  the  most  inveterate 
habit  was  the  use  of  tobacco,  and  those  of  us  who 
had  never  used  it  were  truly  fortunate,  as  it  was  a 
contraband  article,  and  difficult  to  procure. 

The  old  sailing-master  was  a  great  slave  to  the 
weed,  and  it  was  always  gratifying  to  meet  his  good- 


THE    OLD    SAILING-MASTER^    "  QUID."  275 

natured  face  when  his  pipe  was  well  filled  and  pro- 
truding full  two  inches  from  his  contented  counte- 
nance. Then  his  happy  looks  made  one  feel  bet- 
ter; but  on  those  occasions  when  he  could  not  fill 
his  pipe,  both  his  face  and  his  gait  reminded  us  of  a 
funeral  procession,  and  made  us  feel  sad.  Much, 
however,  as  he  loved  his  pipe,  he  did  not  love  it  so 
well  but  that  he  would  stop,  no  matter  how  great 
his  hurry,  and  let  a  comrade  take  a  pull  at  it — 
half  a  dozen  long,  strong  pulls.  As  liberal  as  he  was 
with  his  tobacco,  still,  at  times,  "  the  boys"  would 
depredate  upon  him. 

Near  the  head  of  his  sheepskin,  where  he  slept, 
there  was  a  crack  in  the  wall,  into  which,  after  the 
lights  were  blown  out,  he  would  carefully  transfer 
his  "  old  soldier,"  when  frequently  those  best  "  at 
crawling"  would  ease  it  out  of  the  crack  and  regrind 
it.  If  they  failed  to  replace  it  in  the  crack,  the  first 
thing  in  the  morning  we  would  hear  the  old  sailing- 
master  sing  out,  "  By  my  soul,  boys,  my  old  soldier 
is  adrift ;"  but  should  he  find  it  in  the  crack,  and 
fresh  from  the  mill,  his  song  would  then  be,  "  By  my 
soul,  boys,  some  of  you  have  been  foul  of  my  old 
soldier."  Then,  after  igniting  a  loco  foco,  he  being 
"  quarterlero  ocho,"  would  commence  and  sweep 
up  the  decks ;  the  conclusion  of  which  operation 
was  always  with  the  grateful  acknowledgment, 
"  Now,  by  my  soul,  I  have  got  a  good  '  prespera- 
tion,' "  at  the  same  time  wiping  the  exuberant  drops 
from  his  benevolent  physiogomy. 


276  SUTLER,    WIFE,    AND    DAUGHTER. 

On  certain  days  we  had  the  privilege  of  buying 
brandy  at  the  tienda,  shop,  a  kind  of  sutler  store, 
kept  by  the  wife  and  daughter  of  a  superannuated 
lieutenant.  The  old  man  was  a  dried-up  octogena- 
rian, who  had  served  under  Napoleon  in  Italy.  He 
occasionally  looked  after  our  men  at  work,  and  was 
not  a  bad  man.  His  wife  was  about  thirty  years  his 
junior,  and  weighed  two  hundred  and  thirty  pounds, 
and  was  the  most  stingy  fat  woman  I  ever  knew. 
The  daughter  was  twenty  years  her  junior,  and 
twenty  pounds  her  senior :  her  face  was  marked 
with  small-pox :  she  was,  however,  one  of  the  best- 
tempered  women  of  her  size.  She  made  but  slow 
progress  in  English,  yet  always  met  us  with  a  smile. 

Her  venerable  sire  still  called  her  'Nina,  by  the 
fond  name  he  did  thirty  years  ago,  which  means 
child.  We  called  her  Senorita  Nina ;  others  of  our 
boys,  who  made  as  slow  progress  in  Spanish  as  did 
Nina  in  English,  called  her  Senorita,  muy  bonita,  with 
a  low  bow,  the  English  of  which  is,  Miss,  very  pret- 
ty ;  but  the  low  bow  gave  it  the  undehnable  touch. 
There  were  still  other  Texians  who  were  not  up  to 
this,  and  who  employed  a  language  which  all  seem- 
ed to  understand  and  no  one  could  explain.  They 
would  tip  Senorita  Nina  Mr.  Kendall's  admirable 
"  can't-come-it-judge"  motion  with  a  low  bow,  and 
the  sight  of  a  picayune,  and  the  good  creature  never 
failed  to  wet  their  whistles. 

The  high  estimation  in  which  these  people  gen- 
erally held  Texians  may  be  known  from  the  fact 


SHIFTS    TO    GET    BRANDY.  277 

that  many  of  us  could  get  credit  for  a  dollar's  worth, 
some  even  five,  without  a  pledge  of  any  kind,  when 
they  would  not  trust  one  of  their  own  officers  with- 
out he  left  his  straps,  sword-belt,  or  something  in 
pledge  corresponding  to  the  amount  purchased.  Se- 
norita  Nina  frequently  invited  Colonel  Fisher,  Colqu- 
houn,  Ogden,  Van  Ness,  myself,  and  others,  into  her 
back  parlour  to  drink  our  vino  mascal,  and  would  fre- 
quently remark,  when  she  would  return  from  the  store, 
"  What  a  very  strange  people  you  are  !  I  can  leave 
you  here  by  yourselves,  and  you  won't  steal  a  thing." 

There  were  certain  days  that  it  was  positively 
against  orders  to  sell  us  brandy.  On  these  occa- 
sions many  were  the  shifts  resorted  to  for  procuring 
it.  One  of  their  soldiers,  in  going  to  town,  would  cut 
off  about  three  feet  of  the  bowels  of  a  beeve,  tie  up 
one  end,  fill  it  full,  tie  up  the  other,  and  then  curl  it  up 
like  a  snake  in  the  top  of  his  cap,  bring  it  in  the  cas- 
tle, and  retail  it  to  us  at  a  usurious  profit  "  per  suck." 

There  also  lived  in  the  castle  a  frisky,  laughing, 
handsome  little  woman,  the  wife  of  a  sergeant.  She 
hated  to  see  the  poor  Texians  suffer,  and  would 
smuggle  it  in  a  beeve's  bladder,  out  of  which  many  a 
time  we  have  drank  to  "  the  glory,  honour,  and  liber- 
ty of  Texas!1 

On  these  occasions,  under  the  pretence  of  looking 
after  our  washerwoman  to  get  a  light-coloured  shirt, 
we  would  step  in,  and  after  giving  her  the  "  can't- 
come-it-judge,"  we  were  always  answered  by  the 
pert  little  woman,  first  taking  the  forefinger  of  her 


278  dan  :  his  "  soldier's  tear." 

right  hand,  placing  it  under  the  right  eye,  and  pull- 
ing down  the  skin  until  you  could  see  the  red  of  the 
ball.  This  meant,  "  Look  out  for  the  officers  while 
I  pour  out  of  the  bladder." 

This  good  little  woman  had  also  a  high  opinion 
of  our  integrity :  in  her  front  room  she  kept  for  sale 
fancy  articles  upon  her  centre-table,  which  we  would 
take  up  and  examine  with  Yankee  curiosity  while 
she  would  be  in  the  back  room  exhuming  the  blad- 
der. Frequently,  when  she  would  return,  after  cast- 
ing her  eye  quickly  over  the  table  to  see  that  all  was 
right,  she  would  hold  up  both  hands,  with  her  pretty 
round  face  elongated  into  expressible  surprise,  ex- 
claiming, at  the  same  time,  "  What  a  very  strange 
people  you  are  !  I  can  leave  you  here  by  yourselves, 
and  you  won't  steal  a  thing.  Why,  I  would  not 
trust  the  governor  here  by  himself!" 

Our  friend  Dan,  on  these  and  similar  occasions, 
would  make  himself  useful.  He,  though  a  rare  bird, 
was  not  after  Ovid's  description,  "  rara  avis  in  terre. 
nigroque  simillima  cygno"  but  was  of  the  gayest 
plumage  and  the  most  eloquent  discourse.  Often, 
when  he  has  made  these  good  women  cry  by  first 
translating  and  then  singing  the  "  Soldier's  Tear," 
they  would  wipe  away  their  tears  and  pity  our 
sweethearts. 

Dan  was  formerly  a  midshipman  in  the  United 
States  service,  and  attached  to  the  Brandywine  on 
the  Pacific  station,  where  he  learned  the  language 
of  these  people ;  but,  like  several  other  brave  and 


HOW   DAN   AVOIDED   WORK. 


279 


generous  spirits,  he  quitted  that  honourable  service 
to  fight  for  the  liberty  of  our  rising  star.  As  mid- 
shipman, he  had  taken  early  lessons  in  the  arts  of 
the  "Old  Soldier."  He  was  a  proficient  in  raising 
a  chew  of  tobacco,  and  sung  himself  into  many  a 
glass  of  vino ;  but  his  genius  never  showed  the  true 
intellect  until  he  was  ordered  out  to  work. 

One  day  at  this  rural  sport  of  packing  volcanic 
stones  from  the  mountains  was  enough  to  satisfy  his 
curiosity,  and  he  wisely  concluded  that,  inasmuch 
as  he  never  put  any  of  these  stones  on  the  mount- 
ains, "he  would  be  shot  if  he  took  any  away." 

How  was  this  to  be  avoided  1  He  took  a  steel 
pen  from  my  writing  table  in  the  corner,  scratched 
his  legs  from  his  ankle  to  the  knee,  wrapped  them 
around  in  many  folds  of  old  shirts  and  blankets,  and 
quietly  awaited  the  second  order.  When  the  order 
came,  his  legs  were  in  a  high  state  of  inflammation 
from  their  superabundance  of  clothing,  so  much  so 
that  the  surgeon  had  the  irons  taken  off  his  ankles. 
The  consequence  was,  that  Dan's  first  day  of  packing 
stones  was  his  last.  Afterward  it  was  easy  for  him 
to  increase  the  inflammation  upon  inspection  days. 

Dan's  knowledge  of  the  Spanish,  and  exemp- 
tion from  work,  made  him  a  kind  of  moving  oracle 
among  this  ignorant  population  of  Mexican  soldiers 
and  sergeants'  wives.  For  a  long  time  h@  was  a 
favourite  among  the  latter,  to  whom  he  generally 
paid  our  washing  bills,  and  to  whom  he  would,  as 
usual,  first  translate,  and  then  sing,  "Long,  long  ago." 
When  he  would  come  to 


280  DAN   A   "HERETIC." 

"  Now  that  you've  come,  all  my  griefs  are  removed, 
Let  me  forget  that  so  long  you  have  roam'd  ; 
Let  me  believe  that  you  love  as  you  loved 

Long,  long  ago— long,  long  ago," 

he  would  throw  into  the  "long,  long  ago"  such  a 
pathetic  physiognomy  that  he  rarely  failed  to  melt 
his  fair  hearers. 

Alas !  everything  on  earth  is  mutable,  and  Dan's 
favour  met  a  check  from  which  it  never  recovered. 

If  there  are  any  people  more  than  others  tena- 
cious of  their  religious  tenets,  it  is  the  Catholics  of 
Mexico.  These  women  had  a  number  of  sprightly 
children,  who  became  very  fond  of  Dan.  He  had 
nothing  to  do,  and  could  talk  Spanish  to  them. 
They  all  had  their  Catechisms,  and  held  the  opinion 
that  we  had  some  immediate  agency  in  killing  their 
beloved  Saviour,  and  not  a  very  long  time  since  ; 
but  Dan  persuaded  these  little  fellows  that  we  were 
not  the  people  who  killed  their  beloved  Jesus — that 
it  was  the  Mexicans  themselves:  "for,"  said  he,  "do 
you  not  see  that  they  have  crowned  him  with  a 
wreath  of  thorns  1  we  have  no  thorns  in  our  coun- 
try :  and  do  you  not  also  see  that  there  ranchero 
spearing  him  in  the  side  with  a  long  lance  ?  we  have 
neither  rancheros  nor  lances  in  our  country:  we 
fight  with  the  rifle."  So  soon  as  these  good  moth- 
ers found  what  an  inroad  Dan  had  made  in  the 
"  young  idea,"  he  lost  all  favour  ;  and  when  he 
would  come  about  afterward,  they  would  call  in  the 
little  chaps  with  the  most  anxious  care,  and  stand 
between  them  and  Dan  like  an  old  hen  between  a 
hawk  and  her  brood. 


AN    INCIDENT.  281 

If  anything  exceeded  the  horror  which  Dan's 
heresy  inspired  in  these  ignorant  people,  it  was  a 
scene  we  witnessed  in  the  commencement  of  the 
campaign.  While  our  volunteer  army  was  collect- 
ing about  Bexar,  preparatory  to  the  march  upon 
the  Rio  Grande,  a  portion  of  them  were  encamped 
near  the  Mission  Church  of  San  Jose.  Around  the 
door-facing  of  this  church,  as  most  churches  in 
Mexico,  there  are  a  number  of  scriptural  images  cut 
in  stone,  and  among  them  one  of  the  fathers  with 
the  infant  Messiah  in  his  hands.  On  this  occasion, 
one  of  our  buckskin  Republicans,  who  had  struck 
for  liberty,  rode  up,  and  not  finding  a  convenient 
swinging  limb  to  hitch  his  "  critter"  to,  he  threw  the 
larieta  over  the  head  of  the  young  Jesus.  Very 
soon  the  animal  took  fright,  pulled  back,  and  car- 
ried away  the  head.  At  the  sight  of  which,  the 
men,  women,  and  children,  old  and  young,  swarmed 
around  the  desecrated  image,  crossing  themselves 
in  prayer,  showing  by  their  countenances  a  degree 
of  grief,  indignation,  and  horror  which  it  would  be 
impossible  to  describe. 

The  first  care  of  our  liberty-man  was  to  secure 
his  horse,  and  then  he  went  up  to  the  old  woman 
who  held  the  head,  and  appeared,  if  possible,  more 
distressed  than  the  balance,  and  said,  "  Ole  'oman, 
now  it  ain't  no  use  to  make  such  a  fuss  about  the 
thing.  I  didn't  know  that  the  'tarnal  critter  was 
goin'  to  pull  off  his  head  :  you  have  got  d — n  mean 
stone  about  here,  anyhow."    This  speech  the  Repub- 

Nn 


282  dan's  intellectual  recreation. 

lican  considered  the  amende  honorable \  and  went  his 
way  whistling,  leaving  the  group  in  prayer  to  propi- 
tiate the  calamity. 

A  gentleman  of  Dan's  leisure  now  required  intel- 
lectual recreation,  and  among  his  other  teachings  he 
persuaded  the  ignorant  Peon  who  sold  us  ass's  milk 
that  "  it  was  the  richness  of  the  milk  which  made 
their  ears  so  much  longer  than  either  those  of  the 
cow  or  horse,"  and  that  the  length  of  their  ears  re- 
spectively was  in  proportion  to  the  substance  of  the 
milk ;  "  for,"  says  he,  "  don't  you  see  that  corn  will 
grow  higher  in  rich  than  in  poor  land  ?"  There  was 
no  resisting  this  argument,  and  this  poor  fellow  left 
the  castle  a  wiser  man  than  any  other  dealer  in  ass's 
milk. 

Mr.  Black,  the  American  consul  in  Mexico,  hu- 
manely sent  us  a  trunk  of  clothes  and  a  blanket  each, 
for  which  we  were  sincerely  thankful.  Captain 
West,  formerly  of  Philadelphia,  also  sent  us  from 
Mexico  a  trunk  of  clothes  and  some  writing  mate- 
rials, for  which  we  acknowledged  many  obligations. 
Also,  Dr. ,  and  Senor  Conzalvi,*  sent  us  a  pack- 
age of  English  books,  which  rendered  our  confine- 
ment more  tolerable,  and  for  which  we  shall  long  re- 
member them  with  gratitude. 

*  August,  1845.  A  few  days  since,  in  passing  up  Canal-street,  in  New- 
York,  I  met  at  118,  where  he  keeps  a  coffee-house,  this  excellent  man, 
Senor  Conzalvi.  His  disinterested  friendship  in  furnishing  my  destitute 
comrades  clothing,  bread,  and  medicine  became  known  to  the  Mexican 
authorities,  and  he  had  to  fly.  He  is  a  Corsican  by  birth,  deserves  the 
lasting  gratitude  of  Texians,  and  the  good-will  of  all  just  men. 


BILLY    REESE. CRUEL    TREATMENT.  283 

Young  Billy  Reese,  who  had  just  recovered  from 
a  dangerous  illness  in  Mexico,  was  on  his  way  to 
Texas,  and  came  by  to  see  us.  He  confirmed  the 
melancholy  intelligence  of  the  decimation  of  our  sev- 
enteen companions  at  Salado.  This  intelligence 
threw  a  still  darker  gloom  over  our  imprisonment. 
When,  a  few  days  after,  we  heard  of  the  shooting  of 
the  heroic  Captain  Cameron,  and  the  more  than  he- 
roic manner  in  which  they  all  met  death,  all  of  us 
shed  tears  to  their  memory — we  trust,  not  tears  of 
forgetfulness. 

After  the  horrible  murder  of  our  seventeen  coun- 
trymen at  Salado  on  the  25th  of  March,  the  main 
body  of  the  survivors  were  marched  on  the  road  to 
the  capital,  a  distance  of  five  hundred  miles,  under 
sufferings  the  most  cruel,  which  killed  several ;  and 
many  others,  being  unable  to  travel,  were  left  in  the 
hospitals  of  San  Luis  Potosi,  Dolores,  and  San  Juan 
del  Rio,  from  which  miserable  sinks  but  few  ever  re- 
turned. It  would  be  swelling  this  journal  beyond  all 
reasonable  bounds  to  detail  the  actual  suffering  of 
these  men ;  indeed,  language  would  give  the  reader 
but  a  poor  idea  of  these  sad  recollections.  Thus, 
after  thirty  days'  march,  they  arrived  at  the  village 
of  Huehuetoca,  seven  leagues  from  the  city  of  Mex- 
ico, where  they  were  all  crowded  together  in  a  room 
too  small  to  permit  of  their  lying  down,  and  into 
which  not  a  breath  of  air  could  enter  when  the  door 
was  closed.  In  a  very  little  time  the  air  became  so 
impure,  from  the  exhaustion  of  the  oxygen,  that  the 


284  THE   "SAD   night." 

candles  went  out,  and  respiration  became  exceeding- 
ly difficult.  They  in  vain  appealed  to  the  guards  at 
the  door  to  let  in  fresh  air,  and  when  death  the  most 
cruel  stared  them  wholesale  in  the  face,  as  a  last  al- 
ternative they  had  recourse  to  cutting  holes  in  the 
door  with  their  pocket  knives,  and  alternately  breath- 
ing at  these  small  orifices. 

This  was,  indeed,  as  the  Mexican  soldiers  called 
it,  la  noche  triste,  "  the  sad  night."  Their  march  of 
many  leagues  the  day  before,  through  an  insufferable 
dust,  a  burning  sun,  the  want  of  food  and  water,  and 
then  at  night  not  even  space  sufficient  of  the  stone 
floor  to  lie  upon,  and  a  suffocating  atmosphere  to 
breathe,  was  not  their  full  measure  of  wo.  About 
eight  o'clock  at  night  a  menial  murderer,  with  a  pair 
of  epaulets  upon  his  shoulders,  and  a  guard  of  about 
one  dozen  mounted  men,  under  broad-brimmed  hats, 
arrived  with  orders  from  the  tyrant  Santa  Anna  to 
shoot  the  bold  and  beloved  Captain  Ewin  Cameron. 

Captain  Cameron  was  unchained  from  his  part- 
ner, Colonel  Win.  F.  Wilson,  and,  with  his  interpret- 
er, Alfred  Thurmond,  taken  out  of  prison,  and  kept 
under  a  separate  guard  until  morning;  and  when  in- 
formed that  he  was  to  be  shot,  wrote  a  manly  and 
dignified  letter  of  remonstrance  to  the  British  minis- 
ter against  such  a  cold-blooded  murder  of  a  national 
enemy  and  a  British  subject.  The  writer  regrets  his 
inability  as  yet  to  be  able  to  procure  this  last  letter. 

The  next  morning,  after  our  men  were  marched 
for  the  city  of  Mexico,  he  was  taken  out  in  the  rear 


--'\ 


SHOOTING    OF    CAPTAIN    CAMERON.  285 

of  the  village  to  the  place  of  execution.  A  priest, 
the  usual  attendant  of  Mexican  executions,  was  in 
waiting,  and  when  he  was  asked  if  he  wished  to 
confess  to  the  father,  he  promptly  answered,  "  No ! 
throughout  life  I  believe  that  I  have  lived  an  upright 
man,  and  if  I  have  to  confess  it  shall  be  to  my  Ma- 
ker." His  arms  were  then  tied  with  a  cord  at  the 
elbows  and  drawn  back,  and  when  the  guard  advan- 
ced to  bandage  his  eyes,  he  said  to  his  interpreter, 
"  Tell  them  no  !  Ewin  Cameron  can  now,  as  he  has 
often  done  before  for  the  liberty  of  Texas,  look  death 
in  the  face  without  winking."  So  saying,  he  threw 
his  hat  and  blanket  upon  the  ground,  opened  the 
bosom  of  his  hunting-shirt,  presented  his  naked 
breast,  and  gave  the  word  "  Fire !"  when  his  noble 
soul  in  a  twinkling  passed  into  another,  we  trust  a 
better  world.  Thus  fell  Ewin  Cameron !  Long, 
long  will  the  patriotic  of  his  adopted  country  cherish 
the  memory  of  one  whose  bosom  was  bared  to  every 
danger,  and  whose  life  was  sacrificed  to  liberty. 

As  we  have  before  said,  he  was  a  Scotchman,  and 
a  more  honourable  or  bolder  Scotchman  never  left 
his  native  land.  He  was  about  thirty-six  years  of 
age,  tall  and  well  proportioned,  weighing  nearly  two 
hundred  pounds,  and  of  extraordinary  physical  pow- 
er, which  was  in  perfect  keeping  with  his  manly 
countenance  and  lion  heart.  We  recollect  him  well 
at  the  battle  of  Mier,  defending  with  his  gallant  com- 
pany one  of  our  most  exposed  situations.  He  wore 
a  bowie-knife  at  his  side,  and  held  in  his  hand  a  tre- 


286  REMINISCENCE    OF    CAPTAIN    CAMERON. 

mendous  rifle  which  carried  ten  balls  to  the  pound ; 
and  it  was  certain  death  for  an  enemy  to  cover  his 
sight  at  three  hundred  yards.  On  one  occasion  du- 
ring the  action,  a  column  of  the  enemy  charged  so 
near  upon  his  position,  along  a  low  stone  wall  four 
feet  high,  and  not  having  time  to  reload,  he  thunder- 
ed out,  in  his  ever-memorable,  glorious  Highland 
brogue,  "Boys,  to  your  stones  /"  No  sooner  said  than 
a  shower  of  fifty  well-aimed  pebbles,  about  the  size 
of  one's  fist,  saluted  the  assailants,  knocking  down 
many,  and  scattering  the  remainder  to  the  four 
winds.  This  sensible  man,  with  an  intuitive  fore- 
cast which  he  could  never  have  picked  from  all  the 
books  of  all  the  wars,  previous  to  the  charge  ordered 
his  company,  stationed  along  the  before-mentioned 
wall,  to  "pile  up  good-sized  throwing-stones,"  and 
keep  them  in  readiness  as  a  corps  de  reserve.  They 
proved  to  be  as  effective  as  if  they  had  been  hurled 
by  steam-power ;  for  the  fact  was  ascertained  after 
the  battle  that  several  of  the  enemy  were  found  dead 
without  having  their  skins  broken,  such  was  the  ef- 
fect of  this  novel  repulse. 

Lieutenant  George  B.  Crittenden,  who  had  been 
also  released  by  order  of  Santa  Anna,  came  by  to 
see  us.  He  was  permitted  to  remain  locked  up  in 
prison  with  us  one  hour,  and  by  him  we  sent  home 
many  messages  to  wives,  sweethearts,  and  country- 
men. 

Orlando  Phelps,  who  had  also  been  released  by 
Santa  Anna,  came  by  to  see  us,  which  afforded  us 


DR.  PHELPS  AND  SANTA  ANNA.       287 

another  opportunity  to  write  home.  The  release 
of  Phelps  shows  that  the  President  of  Mexico  is  not 
wholly  destitute  of  gratitude.  When  he  was  con- 
fined a  prisoner  at  Orozimbo,  in  Texas,  the  seat  of 
Dr.  Phelps,  in  1836,  and  failed  in  his  attempt  to  poi- 
son his  guards,  he  was  ironed  by  Captain  Patton, 
the  officer  in  charge  of  him.  This  threw  such  a 
gloom  over  his  destiny,  that  in  a  fit  of  despondence 
he  determined  to  drink  the  poison  prepared  for  his 
guards.  Dr.  Phelps  succeeded  in  pumping  it  from 
his  stomach  and  restoring  him,  for  which  he  gener- 
ously released  his  son,  and  furnished  him  means  to 
return  home. 

Owing  to  Santa  Anna's  personal  hostility  to  my- 
self, I  had  nothing  to  hope  from  his  clemency,  and 
but  little  to  desire.  With  my  letter  of  the  25th  of 
April  to  the  President  of  the  United  States,  of  which 
the  following  is  a  copy,  I  had  done  everything  in  be- 
half of  my  unfortunate  countrymen  which  my  situ- 
ation would  allow,  and  I  determined  to  migrate  to 
Texas,  where  I  could  prosecute  the  argument  in  a 
different  shape. 

"  Castle  of  Perote,  Mexico,  April  25th,  1843. 

"  To  his  Excellency  John  Tyler,  ) 

President  of  the  United  States  of  America  :  ) 

"  Sir, — This  will  inform  your  excellency  that  I 
am  one  of  two  hundred  and  forty-eight  Texians 
who  were  taken  prisoners  of  war  by  General  Pedro 
d'Ampudia,  of  the  Mexican  army,  on  the  26th  of 
December  ultimo,  at  Mier.     On  the  11th  of  Janua- 


288       LETTER  TO  PRESIDENT  TYLER. 

ry,  with  the  permission  of  General  Ampudia,  I  ad- 
dressed you  a  hurried  note  from  Matamoras  upon 
the  subject  of  our  captivity,  and  not  hearing  wheth- 
er said  note  ever  reached  its  destination,  I  am  indu- 
ced to  write  again.  In  the  above-named  note  I 
solicited  your  intercession,  as  the  head  of  a  neutral 
and  friendly  power,  in  our  behalf,  and  in  the  then 
hurry  and  limited  time  of  writing,  suggested  only  one 
ground  for  your  intercession,  which  I  then  thought 
and  still  believe,  tenable.  Since  which,  other  and 
stronger  reasons  have  occurred  to  my  mind  in  fa- 
vour of  your  doing  so,  which  you  will  please  per- 
mit me  to  state  more  fully. 

"In  my  note  of  the  11th  of  January,  I  assumed 
the  position  that  a  seven  years'  maintenance  of  our 
nationality,  which  is  recognised  by  the  most  enlight- 
ened and  powerful  nations  of  the  earth,  has  taken 
from  us  the  character  of  a  "rebel province"  and  this 
consideration  entitles  us  to  all  the  tolerations  of 
civilized  warfare.  I  was  more  confirmed  in  this 
position  when  I  understood  that  the  Mexican  gov- 
ernment last  summer  declared  that  on  their  part  the 
war  with  Texas  should  hereafter  be  conducted  upon 
the  strictest  principles  of  civilized  nations.  This 
declaration  I  understood  to  have  been  made  to  the 
foreign  minister  resident  near  Mexico,  with  the  far- 
ther declaration  that  "no  farther  interference  upon 
their  part  should  be  allowed  in  favour  of  the  subjects 
of  their  respective  countries  who  should  be  found  in 
arms  with  the  Texians,  but  that  they  would  be  treat- 


LETTER    TO    PRESIDENT    TYLER.  289 

ed  as  prisoners  of  war."  This  principle,  so  boldly 
avowed  in  the  proclamation  of  Major-general  Aris- 
ta, commanding  the  army  del  Norte  of  Mexico,  was 
widely  distributed  in  Texas  last  spring  when  inva- 
ded by  General  Vascus,  under  his  (Arista's)  orders, 
and  also  when  General  Woll  invaded  Texas  he 
made  a  like  declaration. 

"  If,  then,  the  seven  years'  maintenance  of  our 
nationality,  either  with  or  without  this  declaration 
on  the  part  of  Mexico,  entitles  us  to  this  considera- 
tion, which  I  am  bound,  in  respect  to  those  govern- 
ments that  have  so  recognised  us,  to  believe,  let  us 
see  how  far  it  has  been  carried  out. 

"  Last  spring,  when  General  Vascus  invaded  Tex- 
as, the  sacking  of  San  Antonio  and  the  plunder  of 
a  very  large  amount  of  private  property  was  the  con- 
sequence. The  fall  following,  under  General  Woll's 
invasion,  not  only  was  private  property  taken  with- 
out remuneration  to  the  owners,  but  fifty-three  of 
our  best  citizens,  who  had,  in  the  hurry  of  the 
alarm,  risen  from  their  beds  in  defence  of  their  im- 
mediate homes,  to  oppose,  as  they  believed,  a  band 
of  robbers,  were  taken  and  carried  into  captivity — 
truly  and  literally  abducted.  Those  Texians  who 
fought  the  battle  of  Mier  consisted  of  some  of  the 
most  valuable  citizen  soldiers  of  our  country,  who 
assembled  under  the  laws  of  that  country  to  repel 
an  invasion  thereof,  and  surrendered  prisoners  of 
war  under  the  articles  of  capitulation  herewith  en- 
closed, with  the  most  solemn  and  repeated  verbal 

0  o 


290       LETTER  TO  PRESIDENT  TYLER. 

promises  of  their  observance  and  good  treatment  by 
the  general  in  command  of  the  Mexian  forces.  How 
far  these  promises  have  been  carried  out  we  will 
hereafter  inquire. 

"  In  my  note  to  your  excellency,  as  above  refer- 
red to,  I  stated,  that  if  this  principle  of  civilized 
warfare  was  to  be  observed,  the  Mexican  nation  was 
still  debtor  to  Texas,  in  way  of  exchange  or  libera- 
tion of  prisoners,  about  five  hundred ;  that  Texas 
had  unconditionally  liberated  about  eight  hundred 
Mexican  prisoners,  and  that  Mexico  had  only  liber- 
ated three  hundred  Texians ;  that,  therefore,  upon 
every  principle  of  exchange  of  prisoners,  we  were 
entitled  to  our  liberation.  Since,  however,  writing 
the  above-named  note,  I  have  reflected,  that  inas- 
much as  the  Texians  had  suspended  hostilities 
against  Mexico  at  your  excellency's  special  request, 
and  while  at  their  respective  firesides,  in  the  peace- 
ful pursuits  of  their  avocations,  some  were  abducted 
from  their  homes  by  that  country  who,  unlike  us,  had 
refused  respect  to  that  request,  and  others  who,  in 
obedience  to  the  highest  of  all  laws,  had  assembled 
to  repel  invasion,  that  there  is  an  obligation  of  the 
highest  national  character  upon  your  government  to 
relieve  us  from  a  situation  in  which  an  obedience  on 
our  part,  and  a  want  of  respect  on  the  part  of  our 
enemy  to  said  request,  has  placed  us.  The  request 
I  allude  to  is  dated  by  Mr.  Webster,  secretary  of 
state  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as  I  now  recol- 
lect, in  July  last,  to  the  Honourable  Mr.  Eves,  charge 
d'affaires  near  the  Texian  government. 


LETTER    TO    PRESIDENT    TYLER.  291 

"I  will  not  stop  here  to  argue,  nor  do  I  believe  it 
necessary  with  one  of  your  national  dignity  and  en- 
lightened wisdom,  how  far  friendly  nations  may  in- 
terfere to  enforce  the  observance  of  those  customs 
which  the  long  practice  of  civilized  nations  has 
made  a  law,  but  respectfully  solicit  of  your  excel- 
lency a  full  consideration  of  the  Texian  and  Mexi- 
can question.  In  the  absence  of  all  authorities  upon 
the  subject,  being  shut  up  with  my  brave  compan- 
ions in  this  uncomfortable  prison,  loaded  with  irons, 
and  treated  with  all  the  indignity  of  state  felons, 
much  allowance  should  be  made  for  the  opinions  of 
one  so  directly  interested.  Candour  impels  me,  how- 
ever, to  say,  that  in  my  humble  judgment  the  imme- 
diate vicinage  of  your  nation  to  the  powers  in  dis- 
pute fully  authorize  your  interference.  If  the  com- 
promising of  your  commercial  relations  and  the  inter- 
est of  your  border  citizens  by  this  protracted  war  of 
nearly  eight  years'  duration — a  war  more  in  name 
than  in  any  bold  attempt  by  Mexico  to  subjugate  Tex- 
as— if  the  bold  and  fearful  avowal  on  the  part  of  our 
enemy  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  your  slave  states — if  the  conduct  of  this 
war,  wholly  deceptious,  uncivilized,  and  cruel,  justi- 
fies such  interference,  to  say  nothing  about  our  near 
relationship—that  we  are  of  the  loins  of  your  man- 
hood, that  we  are  of  the  same  language,  religion, 
and  laws,  and  that  we  are  striving  to  the  mainte- 
nance of  the  same  character  of  government  as 
yours — then  ought  you  to  interfere. 


292  LETTER    TO    PRESIDENT    TYLER. 

"  Your  excellency  will  indulge  me  in  concisely 
summing  up  the  history  of  this  war : 

"  In  its  commencement  in  1835,  the  province  of 
Texas  did  not  rebel  against  the  old  established  gov- 
ernment of  the  mother  state,  but  against  a  new  one 
then  sought  to  be  established.  In  1836,  the  close 
of  the  Mexican  invasion  with  the  battle  of  San  Ja- 
cinto demonstrated  her  ability  to  maintain  her  sep- 
arate independence,  which  the  government  of  the 
United  States  recognised  in  March,  1837.  Since 
which  period,  every  other  nation  to  whom  we  have 
applied,  including  France,  England,  and  Belgium, 
have  done  the  same,  and  Texas  has  continued  an 
unprecedented  growth  in  settlement  and  population. 
On  the  other  hand,  Mexico  has  continued  a  preda- 
tory war  upon  the  borders  of  Texas,  without  once 
attempting  to  resubjugate  her  by  a.  formidable  inva- 
sion. This  predatory  warfare  has  been  marked  by 
treachery  and  cruelty  on  the  part  of  Mexico  unpre- 
cedented in  the  history  of  civilized  nations.  She 
has  captured  our  minister  plenipotentiary  returning 
home  under  his  passports  from  the  government  of 
your  country,  and  incarcerated  him  for  months  in  a 
vile  prison.  She  betrayed  the  lamented  Colonel 
Benjamin  Johnson,  under  the  protection  of  a  flag 
of  truce,  and  murdered  him  in  a  brutal  manner. 
She  in  cold  blood  put  to  death  Colonel  Fannin  and 
four  hundred  brave  men,  in  violation  of  his  articles 
of  capitulation.  She  betrayed  the  Santa  Fe  com- 
mand into  a  surrender,  and  violated  the  most  sol- 


LETTER    TO    PRESIDENT    TYLER.  293 

emn  promises  made  to  them.  Last  spring  she  sum- 
moned the  city  of  San  Antonio  to  surrender,  and 
plundered  her  for  obedience  to  said  summons.  Last 
fall  the  Anglo-American  citizens  of  San  Antonio 
were  taken  from  their  homes,  because  they  thought 
fit  to  defend  themselves  against,  as  they  believed  at 
that  time,  an  unauthorized  band  of  robbers.  Last 
fall,  after  Captain  Dawson's  company  of  Texians 
had  surrendered  to  the  Mexican  army,  four  fifths  of 
them  were  put  to  the  sword,  after  their  arms  were 
given  up.  To  the  shame  of  humanity  I  have  to  re- 
cord the  basest  perfidy  on  their  part  yet.  At  the 
battle  of  Mier,  on  the  26th  of  December  last,  after 
the  Texians  had  fought  them  for  nineteen  consecu- 
tive hours,  killing  and  wounding  more  than  double 
their  own  numbers,  the  Mexican  commander  sent  in 
a  flag  of  truce,  summoning  them  to  surrender,  and 
promising  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  through  his 
leading  officers  and  one  of  the  fathers  of  the  Church, 
that  "  we  should  be  treated  with  all  the  honours  and 
consideration  of  prisoners  of  war."  These  officers, 
among  whom  were  General  De  la  Vega,  and  (Col- 
onels Carasco  and  Blanco,  pledging  with  uplifted 
eyes  the  straps  upon  their  shoulders,  and  the  priest 
of  Comargo,  Padre  De  Lire,  pledging  the  holy  Cath- 
olic religion  to  their  observance.  The  Texians, 
ever  credulous,  as  brave  men  are,  surrendered,  while 
still  they  had  formidable  means  of  resistance  in  their 
hands.  The  result  of  that  surrender  produced  from 
the  general  in  command  the  enclosed  articles  of  ca- 


294  LETTER    TO    PRESIDENT    TYLER. 

pitulation,  which  were  read  to  all  of  our  officers  by 
his  Mexican  interpreter,  "  with  all  the  honours  and 
considerations  of  prisoners  of  war"  we  not  being  al- 
lowed our  interpreter  at  the  reading.  We  after- 
ward learned  the  true  reading  of  this  article  to  be, 
"  with  all  the  considerations  consequent  upon  the  mag- 
nanimous Mexican  nation."  As  representatives  of  a 
people  unused  to  such  low  cunning,  and  believing 
that  with  any  civilized  nation  the  obligation  of  good 
treatment  would  be  as  binding  under  this  article  as 
under  the  one  which  had  been  so  solemnly  promised, 
we  were  for  a  time  content,  and  the  more  so  under 
the  disposition  which  the  Mexican  commander, 
General  Ampudia,  evinced  in  carrying  out  his  prom- 
ises. Soon  after  which  we  were  sent  to  the  capi- 
tal of  Mexico,  from  whence  we  have  been  in- 
carcerated in  this  prison,  coupled  together  with 
cumbrous  iron  chains,  and  made  to  do  not  only  the 
servile  labour  of  policing  the  filth — not  of  our  crea- 
tion— but  doing  the  work  of  mules  and  oxen  in  pack- 
ing in  stones  and  sand  about  one  mile,  and  upon  the 
most  indifferent  rations.  The  greatest  infamy  is 
still  untold  !  When  General  Fisher,  myself,  Cap- 
tain Reese,  and  Lieutenant  Clarke  remonstrated 
against  the  performance  of  degrading  labour,  we 
were  gravely  told  by  the  governor-general  here  that 
we  were  not  prisoners  of  war,  and  could  claim  noth- 
ing under  our  articles  of  capitulation.  Let  me  tell 
the  worst !  I  have  just  learned  that  seventeen  of 
my  brave  companions  have  been  lotteried  for,  and 
shot  in  cold  blood. 


LETTERS  FROM  THE  UNITED  STATES.     295 

"  If  this  catalogue  of  human  outrage  on  the  part 
of  our  enemy,  and  their  sending,  time  after  time 
emissaries  into  your  country  to  stir  up  the  Indians 
to  their  murderous  warfare  upon  our  borders,  with 
other  and  numerous  good  reasons  too  tedious  for 
rehearsal  in  this  letter,  can  claim  your  interference, 
then  let  me  beg  it  in  behalf  of  my  unfortunate  and 
brave  companions.  Our  desire  is  that  we  should  be 
liberated,  because  it  is  just  that  we  should  be  ;  and 
then  that  the  war  should  be  conducted  upon  prin- 
ciples of  civilized  warfare,  because  we  are  too  brave 
to  retaliate  by  such  dastardly  perfidy  and  cowardice. 
Let  this  be  done,  and  we  are  willing,  anxious,  and 
able  to  carry  on  the  war.  I  have  the  honour,  very 
respectfully,  to  be  your  excellency's  obedient  servant, 

"  Thomas  J.  Green." 

I  received  many  letters  from  the  United  States 
expressive  of  the  anxious  solicitude  of  my  friends  in 
my  welfare,  all  of  which  I  acknowledged  with  the 
warmest  gratitude.  I  am  particularly  indebted  to 
President  Tyler,  the  Honourable  Messrs.  Mangum 
and  Haywood,  senators,  and  Mr.  Graham,  late  sen- 
ator from  North  Carolina ;  the  Honourable  John  C. 
Calhoun,  and  others,  for  the  warm  interest  they 
manifested  towards  me.  The  usefulness,  however, 
of  my  friends  was  impaired,  from  the  fact  that  my 
political  connexion  with  Texas  prevented  them  from 
coming  under  pledges  of  my  not  taking  up  arms 
against  Mexico.     The  following  extract  from  my 


296  LETTER    TO    MR.   CALHOUN. 

letter  to  Mr.  Calhoun  denned  my  position  :  "Eight 
years  of  the  prime  of  my  life,  and  a  considerable 
portion  of  my  fortune,  have  been  spent  for  the  es- 
tablishment of  liberty  in  Texas ;  therefore  my 
friends  must  see  that  I  am  too  closely  identified 
with  her  to  take  my  liberty  upon  conditions  which 
may  compromise  my  political  relations  to  her,  and 
I  hope  they  will  avoid  any  promises  of  that  kind." 
So  long  as  the  war  shall  continue  with  Mexico, 
those  who  know  me  will  require  no  assurance  that 
I  shall  be  found  in  the  foremost  ranks  of  her  ene- 
mies. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

ESCAPE  FROM  THE  CASTLE  OF  PER0TE. 
Preparation  to  Escape. — Procuring  a  Map  of  the  Road. — Deceiving  the 
Officer  with  Shaving  Tools. — Work  upon  Breach  in  the  Wall. — Letter 
to  our  Prisoners  in  Mexico. — Santa  Anna's  Birthday. — President  Hous- 
ton's Orders  to  Colonel  Snively  prevents  our  Liberation. — Commodore 
Moore  off"  Campeachy. — Prosecution  of  the  Breach  in  the  Wall. — Lay- 
ing in  Provisions  to  Travel. — Last  Visit  to  "  Guts." — Quarterlero. — 
Voos,  his  Rheumatism,  and  Grunts. — All  decline  the  Escape  but  Six- 
teen.— Left  Papers  with  Colquhoun. — Note  to  Santa  Anna. — Take 
Leave  of  our  Friends. — Turnkeys. — Mode  of  Counting. — Locking  up. — 
Deceiving  the  Sentinels  :  mode  of. — Monte  Bank.— Bull-dance. — Com- 
mence going  Out. —  Toowig. —  Ike  Allen  :  his  Fall. —  Character.— 
Beeve's  Bladder. —  Aguardiente. — Governor. —  "Guts"  and  the  Dia- 
logue.— Stone  hung  in  the  Hole. — The  Herculean  John  Young. — 
Passing  the  Sentinels. — Their  Hailing. — Our  Response. 

Now  that  my  usefulness  either  to  myself  or  my 
fellow-prisoners  was  at  an  end,  I  determined  to  re- 
turn to  my  country,  or  perish  in  the  attempt.     To 


PREPARATIONS  FOR  ESCAPE.         297 

escape  from  this  strong  place,  guarded  as  it  was 
with  the  most  unremitting  vigilance,  was  considered 
impossible  by  the  Mexicans,  and  the  project  requi- 
red the  greatest  caution,  coolness,  and  calculation. 
I  made  known  my  determination  to  Captain  Reese, 
who  agreed  to  join  me  in  the  enterprise,  and  also  to 
stake  his  life  upon  the  issue. 

Our  first  plan  was  to  scale  the  different  walls,  the 
height  of  which  we  could  carefully  estimate  by  the 
eye,  during  some  stormy  night  when  the  sentinels 
could  be  most  easily  passed.  We  accordingly  set 
about  making  arrangements. 

Our  ignorance  of  the  country,  and  the  insur- 
mountable difficulties  of  so  mountainous  a  region, 
rendered  it  first  necessary  that  we  should  have  a 
map  to  travel  by,  and  this  could  only  be  obtained  in 
the  city  of  Mexico.  I  accordingly  wrote  to  a  friend 
to  procure  the  article.  He  returned  for  an  answer 
that  on  a  certain  day  he  would  pass  Perote  in  the 
stage  on  his  way  to  Vera  Cruz,  and  that  I  must 
meet  him  at  the  stage-office,  if  it  were  possible  to 
procure  the  governors  permission.  The  stage  pass- 
es Perote  three  times  per  week  on  its  way  to  Vera 
Cruz  and  back.  The  stage-office  is  in  the  town  of 
Perote,  about  one  mile  from  the  castle;  here  the 
stages  meet,  one  running  from  Vera  Cruz,  and  an- 
other from  the  city  of  Mexico  ;  this  is  the  stopping- 
place  for  the  night.  They  arrive  usually  about  four 
or  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  on  which  days  it  was 
usual  for  the  governor  to  permit  one,  and  sometimes 

Pp 


298      PROCURING  A  MAP  OF  THE  ROAD. 

two  of  our  men  to  go  out  under  a  strong  guard  to 
get  our  papers  and  letters.  I  went  to  the  governor, 
and  asked  permission  to  go  to  the  stage-office,  which 
he  granted,  sending  an  officer  and  six  soldiers  as  a 
guard.  When  I  reached  the  stage-office  the  coach 
from  Mexico  was  already  in,  and  my  friend  waiting 
my  arrival.  We  were  old  acquaintances,  but  nei- 
ther appeared  to  know  the  other.  He  had  in  his 
pocket  the  map  I  was  so  anxious  to  procure,  but 
how  was  that  to  be  given  to  me  ?  The  officer  did 
not  leave  my  side  three  feet,  and  the  soldiers  stood 
single  file  upon  each  side  of  the  door. 

After  some  minutes,  my  friend,  who  spoke  the 
Spanish  language  well,  stepped  up  to  the  officer, 
and  pointing  to  me,  he  said,  "  Is  not  that  a  Texian 
prisoner  ?"  "  Yes  !"  replied  the  officer.  My  friend 
walked  around  me,  and  eyed  me  from  head  to  foot 
as  a  thing  of  much  curiosity ;  then  turning  to  the 
officer,  remarked,  "Well,  such  is  the  fortune  of  war: 
will  you  join  me  in  something  to  drink  ?"  There 
are  very  few  Mexican  officers  who  will  refuse  a 
drink  of  aguardiente,  if  it  cost  them  nothing,  and  he 
readily  consented.  My  friend,  again  turning  to  the 
officer  after  taking  the  drink,  said,  "  Shall  I  offer  the 
poor  prisoner  some  ?"  "  If  you  please,"  was  the 
reply.  I  stepped  up  to  the  counter,  and  while  ta- 
king a  drink,  received  a  hunch  from  the  elbow  of 
my  old  friend.  In  a  little  time  he  again  asked  the 
officer  to  drink,  and  again  his  invitation  was  accept- 
ed, the  officer  taking  a  "  stiff  pull"  each  time.     He 


DECEIVING    THE    OFFICER.  299 

soon  became  good-natured  and  loquacious ;  was 
eloquent  in  giving  this  stage-passenger  a  history  of 
the  Texians,  their  mode  of  warfare,  &c. ;  said  that 
we  were  very  daring,  and  could  shoot  out  one's  eye 
at  three  hundred  yards  with  our  big  rifles,  and 
wound  up  by  depicting  my  character,  performances, 
&c.  He  said  that  I  had  had  Santa  Anna  prisoner 
once  in  my  country  ;  I  ought,  therefore,  to  be  close- 
ly watched,  as  there  was  nothing  too  daring  for 
these  people  to  undertake.  This  new  stage-ac- 
quaintance stepped  into  the  adjoining  room,  and 
returned  in  a  few  minutes  with  a  razor,  hairbrush, 
and  comb,  so  folded  in  a  rumpled  paper  that  their 
ends  plainly  shown.  He  remarked  to  the  officer 
that  "  that  poor  fellow  looks  as  if  he  would  be  the 
better  of  a  good  razor :  can  I  have  the  privilege  of 
giving  him  these  shaving  tools  If  "  Certainly,"  re- 
plied the  officer.  He  handed  them  to  me,  with  a 
wink  which  I  well  understood.  I  carelessly  took 
the  package  in  my  hand,  and  walked  back  to  the 
castle  by  the  side  of  the  officer,  he  little  dreaming 
that  the  rumpled  envelope  was  a  lithographed  map 
of  the  country  between  Vera  Cruz,  via  Perote,  and 
the  City  of  Mexico.  This  survey  had  been  made  a 
few  years  since  by  order  of  the  government  for  a 
railroad  ;  the  rivers,  mountains,  and  passes  were 
plainly  marked.  When  I  reached  my  prison  safe 
with  it,  one  important  difficulty  was  surmounted. 
My  friend  Lodovic  Colquhoun,  being  a  good 
draughtsman,  made  several  copies  of  it. 


300        HOW  TO  MAKE  A  LONG  ROPE. 

Passing  in  and  out  of  the  castle  to  the  stage-office, 
I  had  estimated  the  height  of  the  walls  from  the  bot- 
tom of  the  great  moat  to  the  top  of  the  bastion. 
This  I  was  the  more  easily  enabled  to  do  from 
counting  the  number  of  layers  of  squared  stones,  and 
multiplying  that  number  by  the  thickness  of  each. 
This  ascertained,  the  next  difficulty  was  to  procure 
a  rope  of  sufficient  length  to  tie  to  the  carriage  of 
the  artillery,  pass  over  the  wall,  and  reach  to  the 
bottom.  The  rope  could  be  purchased  in  town,  but 
the  difficulty  was  the  getting  it  in  the  castle.  This 
we  accomplished  by  sending  time  after  time,  and 
purchasing  short  pieces,  that  it  might  not  attract 
notice.  These  several  pieces  once  in  our  prison- 
room,  were  easily  made  into  one  by  the  sailor 
experience  of  several  of  our  companions.  It  is 
about  as  easy  for  the  old  sailing-master  to  splice  a 
rope  as  it  is  for  a  landsman  to  cut  one  in  two. 

Our  preparation  had  progressed  thus  far  with  en- 
tire success,  but  yet  there  were  many  difficulties  to 
overcome,  one  of  which  was  to  elude  the  vigilance 
of  the  officer  at  lock-up  time. 

At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  we  had  to  be  count- 
ed before  being  locked  up  for  the  night.  If  we 
were  out  of  the  room,  how  were  our  places  to  be 
supplied  1  This  we  could  do  by  getting  our  inter- 
preter to  say  that  "there  lie  two  very  sick,"  point- 
ing to  our  mats,  carefully  folded  over  some  baskets, 
and  our  hats  laying  as  if  they  covered  our  faces. 
The  probability  of  the  officer  taking  it  for  granted 


ARRANGEMENTS    SUSPENDED.  301 

was  the  risk  we  had  to  run.  In  the  mean  time  we 
would  be  in  a  stable  opposite  our  prison-room,  and 
concealed  with  our  rope  under  some  straw.  At  a 
few  minutes  before  nine,  having  chosen  a  stormy, 
cold  night,  we  could  crawl  past  the  sentinel  upon 
all  fours,  and  then  climbing  up  against  the  gate,  and 
one  standing  upon  the  shoulder  of  the  other,  could 
reach  the  top  ;  then  descending  upon  the  opposite 
side  by  the  rope,  the  first  holding  one  end  for  the 
other  to  descend  by,  one  being  over,  he  could  hold 
the  rope  for  the  other  to  ascend  by,  and  thence  to 
the  shoulders  of  the  first.  This  operation  would 
place  us  upon  the  steps,  which  would  ascend  to  the 
top  of  the  castle,  and  by  carefully  crawling  past  the 
upper  sentinels,  and  tying  one  end  of  the  rope  to 
the  wheel  of  a  cannon,  we  could  descend  to  the  bot- 
tom of  the  moat. 

With  all  our  arrangements  completed  for  our  mi- 
gration, we  were  yet  prevented  from  so  doing  at 
this  time,  on  account  of  the  following  circumstances: 

In  the  centre  one  of  our  prison-rooms,  which 
contained  thirty-six  of  our  countrymen,  a  few  lion- 
hearted  fellows  determined  also  to  make  the  attempt 
at  escaping.  They  had  commenced  the  operation 
of  going  through  an  eight  feet  wall,  and  if  Captain 
Reese  and  myself  escaped  by  scaling  the  walls, 
which  we  now  considered  pretty  certain  of  accom- 
plishing, it  would,  consequently,  break  up  all  farther 
chances  of  others  doing  so  by  any  means  whatever. 
We  then  determined  to  join  in  the  plan  of  going- 
through  the  walls,  and  all  escaping  at  the  same  time. 


302  LETTER    TO    FELLOW-PRISONERS. 

The  breach  was  in  progress  of  being  made,  sev- 
eral weeks  having  been  spent  at  work  on  it,  and  all 
who  determined  upon  the  hazard  were  in  high 
spirits,  when  we  were  informed,  through  General 
Thompson  and  several  other  sources,  that  we  would 
be  released  on  the  13th  of  June,  Santa  Anna's  birth- 
day. Indeed,  our  information  appeared  to  be  so  au- 
thentic we  did  not  doubt  it,  and  consequently  knock- 
ed off  from  our  work  upon  the  breach  in  the  wall. 
General  Thompson  wrote  down  to  us  to  make  prep- 
aration for  going  home ;  and,  knowing  that  the  yel- 
low fever  was  raging  at  Vera  Cruz  in  its  most  ma- 
lignant form,  I  feared  that  our  countrymen  would  go 
to  that  place  in  advance  of  any  preparations  for  sail- 
ing, and  fall  victims  to  the  disease,  as  did  many  of 
the  Santa  Fe  prisoners  the  year  previous.  I  address- 
ed the  following  note  to  our  countrymen  in  Mexico  : 

"  Castle  of  Perote,  June  5th,  1843. 
"  To  Captains  Ryan,  Pierson,  Baker,  and  other  ) 
Texian  Prisoners  of  War  at  Mexico.  $ 

"  Friends  and  Countrymen, — Since  our  separa- 
tion I  have  heard  of  your  difficulties  and  trials,  at 
which  my  heart  has  sorely  bled ;  at  the  same  time, 
we  have  not  been  without  ours.  If  we  have  suffer- 
ed much,  it  will  be  a  consolation  beyond  all  price 
that  it  was  for  our  country,  and  in  the  cause  of  lib- 
erty and  equal  rights ;  and  while  we  mourn  the  loss 
of  one  fifth  of  our  brave  companions,  let  us  believe 
that  our  country  and  posterity  will  do  them  and  us 
justice.     We  are  taught  to  believe  that  justice,  eter- 


LETTER    TO    OUR    PRISONERS    IN    MEXICO.       303 

nal  and  all-pervading,  is  the  peculiar  province  of 
God ;  and  under  this  bright  hope  the  time  must  come, 
when,  in  recounting  our  wrongs,  we  may  point  with 
pride  to  the  debit  side  of  the  account. 

"  We  are  informed  from  various  unofficial  sour- 
ces, besides  through  the  letters  of  the  United  States 
minister  in  Mexico,  that  we  are  to  be  liberated  on 
the  13th  instant  To  see  you  all  safely  landed  at 
home  once  more  is  my  weightiest  care ;  and,  know- 
ing that  but  fewr  of  you  have  the  means,  I  have  ta- 
ken some  steps  to  procure  a  vessel  at  Vera  Cruz,  by 
the  time  of  your  arrival,  for  your  transmission. 
Should  we  be  liberated  on  that  day,  I  have  advised 
our  companions  here  to  stop  at  Xalapa,  about  thirty 
miles  distant,  until  I  can  go  to  Vera  Cruz  and  per- 
fect an  arrangement  for  their  sailing,  as  it  would  be 
very  dangerous  for  them  to  remain  in  that  place, 
where  the  yellow  fever  is  already  bad.  I  also  ad- 
vise you  to  come  to  that  place,  where  you  will  join 
your  comrades,  and  where  I  hope  to  meet  you  with 
the  arrangements  for  sailing. 

"  I  beg,  my  dear  friends,  that  all  and  each  of  you 
will  accept  my  warmest  feelings  for  your  happiness 
and  welfare.  Thomas  J.  Green." 

The  13th  of  June  drew  near,  and  every  officer 
we  met  told  us  that  "  in  a  little  time  we  would  leave 
that  place  and  return  to  our  country  and  friends.'' 
The  soldiers,  by  way  of  congratulating  us,  in  then- 
mixture  of  Spanish  and  English,  would  make  a  flour- 


304       DISHONOURABLE    CONDUCT    OF    HOUSTON. 

ish  peculiar  to  the  Mexican  people,  dash  their  right 
hand  through  their  left  in  the  direction  of  Texas, 
and  say,  "  Poco-tiempo  Texas"  (Texas  in  a  little 
while).  Even  this  from  the  most  stupid  soldier  flat- 
tered our  desire ;  but  still,  the  13th  came  and  went, 
and  no  liberation.  The  next  day  it  was  promised, 
but  the  next  failed  of  liberation.  The  next,  and  still 
the  next,  came  and  passed  under  a  like  promise 
from  our  officers,  bringing  with  each  successive  day 
the  chagrin  of  disappointment  to  take  the  place  of 
joyous  hopes. 

In  a  few  days,  however,  letters  from  the  capital 
explained  the  secret  of  our  detention.  President 
Santa  Anna  had  changed  his  determination  of  liber- 
ating us  as  soon  as  he  was  informed  that  President 
Houston  had  sent  out  a  party  under  Colonel  Snively 
to  rob  the  Santa  Fe  traders.  In  Houston's  order  to 
Snively  it  was  stipulated  that  "  the  spoils  should  be 
equally  divided  between  the  government  and  the  cap- 
tors." Thus,  after  his  open  and  violent  denunciation 
of  the  conduct  of  General  Somerville's  command  at 
Laredo,  he  stipulates  that  the  Republic  of  Texas 
shall  be  a  party  to  this  robbery,  and  a  recipient  of 
the  stolen  goods.  This  news  cast  a  still  darker 
gloom  over  our  destiny ;  we  felt  it  keenly,  because 
in  it  we  saw  our  government  officially  degraded. 
That  influence  which  President  Houston  had  ex- 
erted in  suppressing  the  national  enthusiasm  of 
avenging  our  wrongs— in  keeping  back  Generals 
Rusk,  Mayfield,  and  other  gallant  spirits  from  stri- 


COMMODORE    MOORE    OFF    CAMPEACHY.         6K)b 

king  boldly  upon  the  Rio  Grande  for  our  liberty — 
was  now  employed  in  the  petit  larceny  of  waylaying 
the  road,  and  robbing  a  few  harmless  traders  of  their 
handkerchiefs  and  calicoes. 

With  this  disgraceful  intelligence  from  our  coun- 
try all  hope  of  speedy  liberation  vanished,  and  we 
again  set  to  work  upon  the  breach  in  the  wall. 

One  circumstance,  however,  cheered  us  on  in  our 
work,  and  lightened  our  country's  accumulated  dis- 
grace :  that  was,  that  every  mail  brought  us  news 
that  our  little  navy,  and  the  gallant  Commodore 
Moore,  was  off  Campeachy,  and  had  beaten  and 
blockaded  ten  times  his  naval  force.  Our  corre- 
spondent in  Mexico  sent  us  private  word  that 
Moore  had  taken  the  Mexican  steamers,  and  such 
was  the  belief  for  many  days  in  Mexico.  This 
was  glorious  news,  and  it  exhilarated  our  spirits  to 
the  highest  degree.  We  made  all  the  inquiry  in 
our  power  to  ascertain  the  practicability  of  reach- 
ing Moore  at  Yucatan  by  land,  but  found  it  im- 
practicable, from  the  many  hundred  miles  we  would 
have  to  perform,  through  both  a  mountainous  and 
a  swampy  country. 

As  the  reader  has  been  previously  informed,  our 
arched  cells  were  twenty  feet  wide  by  seventy  long, 
with  a  door  at  one  end  opening  in  the  castle,  and 
a  loophole  at  the  other  opening  upon  the  outside, 
underneath  which  is  the  great  moat.  This  loop- 
hole is  a  small  aperture,  upon  the  outside  about  foui 
by  twelve  inches,  and  gradually  widening  through 


306   PROSECUTION  OF  BREACH  IN  THE  WALL. 

the  eight  feet  wall  upon  the  inside  to  about  two 
feet.  Could  we  have  pursued  this  aperture  by  wi- 
dening it,  our  labour  would  have  been  less  ;  but 
soon  we  found,  from  the  hard  character  of  the  stones, 
and  the  secure  fastenings  immediately  around  the 
hole,  difficulties  which,  with  our  poor  means  of 
operating,  were  impossible  to  surmount.  We  con- 
sequently struck  off  to  the  left,  leaving  these  diffi- 
culties entirely  to  our  right,  and  prepared  to  bore 
through  the  solid  masonry. 

To  avoid  discovery,  both  from  the  sentinel  at  the 
door  and  the  officers  when  they  came  in  the  room 
upon  inspection,  a  careless  rap  upon  the  door  or 
post  by  our  look-out  man  was  sufficient  for  the  oper- 
ator in  the  hole  to  lie  low.  These  men  engaged  in 
the  work  alternately,  as  only  one  at  a  time  could 
operate,  and  he  was  secreted  by  the  shutter  enclo- 
sing the  loophole,  and  blankets  carefully  hung 
about  it.  The  labour  was  extremely  tiresome,  as 
the  hole  had  to  be  made  horizontally  through  the 
wall,  and  consequently  required  the  operator  to  lay 
upon  his  abdomen,  and  rest  upon  his  elbows,  which 
position,  after  a  few  hours'  work,  became  very  pain- 
ful. After  working  his  tour,  he  would  gather  up 
the  fragments  of  stone  and  mortar  which  his  labour 
had  detached,  and  bury  them  under  some  loose 
stone  and  brick  in  the  floor.  As  the  quantity  thus 
buried  would  raise  the  pavement  too  high,  it  would 
be  taken  out  under  our  blankets,  and  emptied  into 
the  comun,  privy. 


USES    OF   THE    BLANKET.  307 

The  tools  with  which  we  operated  were  narrow, 
inferior  carpenter's  chisels — >the  Mexican  tools  were 
generally  of  an  inferior  kind,  which  our  carpenters 
would  bring  from  the  shop.  Some  of  our  men  were 
carpenters  and  wheelwrights,  and  were  employed 
in  the  carpenter  shop  making  artillery  carriages; 
and  as  they  would  have  to  come  to  their  meals,  and 
sleep  in  the  same  prison-cells,  they  would  smuggle 
the  chisels  out  of  the  shop  under  their  blankets. 
The  reader  will  understand  that  our  men  had  to 
wear  blankets  over  their  shoulders  as  an  essential 
portion  of  their  wardrobe  ;  and  as  they  despised 
Mexican  fashion  too  much  to  give  it  that  peculiar 
a  la  Mexicana  sling  about  the  arms,  they  wore  them 
a  la  Texas,  by  first  suspending  the  blanket  over  a 
string,  then  tying  the  ends  of  the  string  round  the 
neck;  and  he  who  was  so  fortunate  as  to  have  a 
warm  one  felt  as  proud  as  a  Roman  senator  with 
his  ermined  toga.  The  Texas  mode,  however,  of 
wearing  the  blanket,  though  different  from  that  of 
the  "blanketed  nation,"  afforded  both  comfort  and 
ample  means  of  smuggling. 

As  a  water-drip  will  wear  away  the  hardest  gran- 
ite, so  the  breach  in  the  wall  gradually  grew  deeper 
under  our  incessant  labour.  This  work  was  prin- 
cipally accomplished  by  drilling  holes  into  the  stone 
and  mortar  with  the  chisel,  and  prying  off  small 
pieces;  and  frequently,  after  a  hard  day's  labour, 
not  more  than  a  hatful  could  be  disengaged.  The 
greatest  difficulty,  however,  was,  that  as  the  hole 


308  LAYING    IN    PROVISIONS. 

grew  deeper,  it  grew  smaller,  and  the  position  of  the 
operator  rendered  it  next  to  impossible  to  avoid  this 
difficulty ;  so  that  when  the  hole  reached  the  out- 
side of  the  wall,  it  had  a  funnel  shape,  the  outer  end 
being  reduced  to  ten  by  fourteen  inches.  On  the 
first  day  of  July  the  hole  had  been  drilled  down  to 
a  thin  shell  on  the  outer  side,  which  could  be  easily 
burst  out,  after  the  final  preparation  was  made  for 
leaving. 

For  some  weeks  previous  to  our  escape,  those 
who  intended  to  go  were  busily  engaged,  every  safe 
opportunity,  in  completing  their  arrangements — fix- 
ing their  knapsacks,  saving  all  the  bread  they  could 
procure,  laying  aside  every  cent  to  purchase  fat  ba- 
con and  chocolate.  Having  been  furnished  money 
by  a  friend  in  Mexico,  I  was  enabled  to  supply  sev- 
eral with  sugar,  coffee,  and  bacon,  which  compen- 
sated for  my  lack  of  work  in  the  hole. 

We  considered  it  imprudent  to  start  with  less 
than  two  weeks'  rations  each,  as  we  calculated  to 
be  all  of  that  time  in  the  mountains  before  venturing 
into  a  settlement  to  replenish  our  stores.  To  buy 
so  large  a  quantity  at  one  time  might  lead  to  suspi- 
cion as  to  what  purpose  we  wanted  them  for,  as 
heretofore  our  purchase  had  been  of  the  smallest 
character.  To  avoid  this  suspicion,  we  had  been 
for  weeks  buying  a  little  at  a  time.  At  length,  Sun- 
day, the  second  day  of  July,  opened  upon  us  with  a 
favourable  symptom.  This  day  we  had  an  officer 
of  the  guard  who  was  considered  less  particular  in 


LAST    VISIT    TO    "  GUTS."  309 

counting  and  inspecting  us  at  lock-up  times ;  and 
though  we  wished  to  celebrate  the  sixty-seventh  an- 
niversary of  our  forefathers'  independence  by  our 
emancipation  from  the  prison,  yet  we  considered 
this  too  favourable  an  opportunity  to  lose.  We  pass- 
ed the  word  for  all  who  intended  to  go  to  be  in 
readiness  by  night. 

I  went  round  to  old  Guts' s  quarters  and  purchased 
my  last  bacon,  chocolate,  and  sugar.  I  found  the  old 
fellow  exceedingly  polite,  and  when  I  laid  his  money 
upon  the  counter,  he  insisted  upon  crediting  me  for 
the  amount,  saying  that  I  might  have  use  for  the 
money.  I  told  him,  "  Short  settlements  make  long 
friends."  He  thanked  me  for  my  custom,  and  hoped 
that  I  would  continue  to  deal  with  him.  I  replied, 
that  the  next  purchase  I  made  in  the  castle  should 
certainly  be  from  him.  So  far  I  have  kept  my 
word. 

In  each  of  the  prison-rooms  one  of  our  men  were 
detailed  and  exempt  from  work,  whose  duty  it  was 
to  sweep  the  room,  receive  the  bread,  count  it  out  to 
each  man,  and  be  responsible  not  only  for  the  gen- 
eral police  of  the  room,  but  also  for  the  safety  of 
everything  in  it.  This  officer  was  termed  "quar- 
terlero,"  and  Voos  held  the  appointment  for  the  cen- 
tre room. 

About  an  hour  before  we  were  locked  up,  I  met 
Voos  with  his  head  and  jaws  tied  up,  and  limping 
along  with  the  greatest  apparent  difficulty.  "What 
is  the  matter,  Voos  V '  said  I ;  when,  after  turning  his 


310    VOOS  :  HIS  RHEUMATISM  AND  GRUNTS. 

head  very  carefully  upon  his  shoulders,  and  rolling 
his  eyes  up  in  the  sockets  with  the  graceful  affecta- 
tion of  a  sick  maid,  then  turning  round  and  survey- 
ing well  the  premises,  he  replied,  "  General,  I  am 
quartelero  of  the  centre  room,  and  it  is  very  neces- 
sary for  me  to  have  the  rheumatism  and  go  to  the 
hospital  before  you  leave,  or  I  shall  catch  it  to-mor- 
row." At  this  moment  an  officer  hove  in  sight,  and 
Voos  hobbled  on.  It  was  the  officer  of  the  guard 
bringing  in  the  surgeon  of  the  hospital  to  examine 
Voos's  rheumatism.  He  pronounced  it  a  very  bad 
case,  and  in  a  few  minutes  four  soldiers  brought  in 
upon  their  shoulders  a  palanquin,  upon  which  Voos 
was  carefully  laid,  when  they  bore  him  from  the 
castle  in  the  most  tender  manner  under  the  reitera- 
tion of  the  most  doleful  grunts. 

This  witty  Dutchman  passed  me  with  a  cunning 
wink,  but  did  not  forget  to  grunt;  and,  until  he  was 
shut  out  from  our  sight  by  the  outer  gate,  these  lu- 
gubrious sounds  came  back  to  those  who  were  in 
the  secret  to  excite  their  risibility  at  the  best  comedy 
of  the  season. 

It  was  considered  the  safest  plan,  after  getting  out 
of  the  castle,  to  pair  off,  and  not  more  than  two  or 
three  go  together,  as,  the  smaller  the  company,  the 
more  easily  they  could  secrete  themselves,  the  whole 
not  being  sufficient  to  carry  on  either  offensive  or 
defensive  operations  to  advantage. 

Under  this  arrangement  I  had  selected  Dan,  main- 
ly on  account  of  his  speaking  the  language  of  the 


DIFFICULTIES    OF    THE    ESCAPE.  311 

country.  I  had  a  pair  of  saddlebags,  which  we 
divided  and  made  into  two  knapsacks,  which  were 
filled  with  fat  bacon,  a  bag  of  ground  coffee  and 
pounded  sugar,  with  several  cakes  of  chocolate,  and 
one  hundred  dollars  in  silver.  I  divided  out  my 
blankets,  sheepskins,  and  clothing  among  my  com- 
panions, putting  on  the  most  indifferent  upon  which 
my  name  was  not  seen.  Our  countrymen  who 
worked  in  the  carpenter's  shop  had  made  each  a 
walking  cane  of  the  sapote  wood,  which  is  very 
heavy  and  strong.  These  canes,  and  a  pocket  knife 
each,  were  our  only  weapons  of  defence. 

Several,  who  had  previously  determined  to  come, 
from  prudential  motives  now  declined  it,  as  they 
considered,  and  very  rightly,  that  getting  through 
the  walls  of  the  prison  was  the  least  difficult  part 
of  the  undertaking.  To  escape  several  hundred 
miles  through  an  enemy's  country,  speaking  an  un- 
known tongue,  was  a  difficulty  which  could  not  be 
too  cautiously  weighed.  If  retaken,  all  calculated 
to  be  shot ;  and  we  farther  calculated  the  chances 
of  success  greatly  against  our  reaching  our  country 
in  safety. 

Knowing  President  Santa  Anna's  personal  hos- 
tility to  myself,  and  believing  that  all  he  wanted 
was  some  reasonable  pretext  for  having  me  shot,  I 
believed  it  was  worth  my  life  to  be  recaptured,  and 
the  chances  of  escaping  were  ten  to  one  against 
me.  Some  of  my  friends  have  considered  this  at- 
tempt rash,  but  these  were  the  questions  I  had  to 


312  SIXTEEN    BOLD    FELLOWS. 

settle  with  my  own  conscience,  and  which  I  did, 
divested  of  all  passion  :  Could  I  be  of  more  service 
at  home  to  my  unfortunate  countrymen  prisoners  ? 
and  was  it  more  honourable  to  myself  and  my  coun- 
try to  draw  in  such  a  lottery,  and  perish  in  the  at- 
tempt, or  longer  live  the  life  of  an  insulted  slave  1 
My  conscientious  duty  pointed  me  to  hazard,  and  I 
embraced  it  without  fear. 

Sixteen  of  our  number  finally  determined  to  make 
the  effort.  Of  the  sixteen,  Richard  Barclay,  R. 
Cornegay,  John  Forester,  John  Dalrymple,  Thom- 
as Hancock,  Isaac  Allen,  John  Young,  Davis,  Stone, 
Beck,  and  Elley,  were  inmates  of  the  centre  prison- 
room,  through  which  the  breach  had  been  made. 
John  Toowig  and  D.  C.  Ogden  belonged  to  the  right- 
hand  room;  Captain  Reese,  Daniel  Drake  Henrie 
(Dan),  and  myself,  belonged  to  the  room  on  the  left. 
To  transfer  ourselves  from  the  outside  rooms  to  the 
one  in  the  centre,  and  get  some  of  the  inmates  of 
that  room  to  supply  our  places  and  elude  the  vigi- 
lance of  the  officers  at  lock-up  hour,  was  a  ticklish 
business  and  required  much  address. 

I  left  my  papers  in  charge  of  my  friend  Ludovic 
Colquhoun,  who,  in  expectation  of  a  close  search 
after  it  was  discovered  that  we  were  gone,  care- 
fully buried  them.  Several  weeks  after  he  forward- 
ed them  through  Colonel  John  Bradley,  who  was 
released  by  Santa  Anna  through  the  intercession  of 
General  A.  Jackson. 

I  left  a  note  upon  my  table  for  President  Santa 


TAKE  LEAVE  OF  FRIENDS.         313 

Anna,  which  I  desired  Colonel  Fisher  to  hand  to 
the  governor  at  counting  time  next  day,  in  which 
I  exculpated  the  officers  of  the  castle  from  either 
knowledge  of  our  going,  or  neglect  of  duty  in  closely 
guarding  us.  Justice  to  these  officers  required  me 
to  say  thus  much ;  and  I  here  repeat  that  not  a  liv- 
ing Mexican  in  the  castle  knew  anything  of  it  until 
after  our  escape.  I  also  stated  to  Santa  Anna  that, 
"  not  having  been  trusted  upon  my  parole,  which 
neither  the  love  of  life  nor  fear  of  death  could  have 
induced  me  to  forfeit,  and  the  climate  of  Perote  not 
suiting  my  health,  I  should,  for  the  present,  retire  to 
one  in  Texas  more  congenial  to  my  feelings." 

At  half  past  five  I  took  leave  of  my  friends,  and 
a  sad  parting  it  was.  Most  who  remained  believed 
it  was  a  voluntary  sacrifice  of  ourselves,  and  few 
believed  it  possible  for  us  to  escape.  I  never  shall 
forget  that  hour.  As  we  grasped  each  other's  hands, 
most  believed  for  the  last  time,  the  big  tear  filled 
the  eyes  of  those  brave  men,  and  they  wished  me 
success  with  an  utterance  which  showed  their  hearts 
were  overflowing.  Said  they,  "  God  grant  that  you 
may  reach  home  in  safety,  for  then  we  know  we 
will  be  fearlessly  and  truly  represented.',  Colonel 
Fisher  said,  "As  you  have  determined  upon  the 
hazard,  though  the  chances  are  greatly  against  you, 
God  grant  that  you  may  reach  home  in  safety.  I 
know  you  will  do  us  justice,  and  will  be  of  infinite- 
ly more  service  to  us  there  than  here."  We  left 
our  prison  room  and  passed  into  the  centre  one, 

Rr 


314  DECEIVING    THE    TURNKEYS. 

from  which  three  of  its  inmates  passed  into  ours. 
Two  from  the  same  room  also  changed  places  with 
Toowig  and  Ogden. 

At  6  o'clock  we  heard  the  turnkey,  with  his  ugly 
load  of  securities  clanking  their  dull  music  to  the 
blast  of  many  bugles  in  the  great  plaza.  It  was  a 
moment  of  intense  excitement,  as  a  discovery  of  one 
man  out  of  his  place  would  blow  up  the  whole  plot. 

The  evening  was  dark,  and  there  was  a  cold  rain, 
which  was  the  most  fortunate  circumstance,  as  the 
officer  would  not  require  us  to  form  in  front  of  our 
prison  doors.  The  men  were  ordered  to  form  in 
our  respective  rooms,  the  back  ends  of  which  were 
measurably  darkened.  At  the  remote  end  of  the 
lines  from  the  doors,  those  who  had  changed  places 
had  taken  their  stations,  with  slouched  hats,  and 
their  blankets  well  muffled  about  their  faces.  In 
such  positions,  and  on  so  dark  an  evening,  it  would 
have  required  a  close  inspection  to  have  told  each 
one  from  his  face.  Still  it  was  deemed  prudent 
that  Captain  Ogden  and  myself  should  lie  upon  the 
floor,  with  our  blankets  drawn  close  around  us,  and 
when  the  count  commenced,  to  have  one  of  our 
men  standing  by  to  say,  "  Here  are  two  fellows  muy 
malo"  (very  sick).  In  the  event  that  the  officer 
should  inspect  us  still  closer,  we  were  to  muffle  our 
faces,  and  grunt  as  if  we  had  the  stomach  ache ;  for 
frijoles  were  very  excellent  to  give  one  pains  in 
those  parts,  and  such  pains  were  not  uncommon 
among  us. 


MODE    OF    COUNTING.  315 

We  selected  places  upon  the  floor  near  each 
other,  and  continued  to  crack  our  jokes  even  in 
this  excitement.  I  thought,  in  the  event  of  our  dis- 
covery, our  situation  would  not  be  so  ludicrous  as 
that  of  Prince  Talleyrand,  when,  at  sea,  he  assu- 
med the  apron,  greasy  face,  and  flesh-fork  of  the 
cook,  as  an  English  cruiser  hove  in  sight.  The 
captain  of  the  vessel  said  that  the  great  diplomatist 
"  could  stand  as  much  like  a  cook,  hold  his  flesh- 
fork  as  much  like  a  cook,  and  look  as  much  like  a 
cook,  every  way,  as  if  he  had  been  born  and  raised 
in  a  caboose."  With  such  an  example,  could  we 
fail  to  represent  the  frijoles  pains  1 

The  count  commenced  in  the  right-hand  room, 
and  presently  we  heard  the  heavy  doors  grating 
upon  their  hinges,  with  the  shaking  of  the  keys, 
which  told  us,  so  far,  "  all's  well."  The  next  mo- 
ment they  were  in  the  centre  room;  the  turnkey 
with  his  huge  bunch,  the  counting  sergeant,  and  the 
officer  of  the  guard,  with  the  quickly-repeated  order 
"Formarse,  formarse"  (to  form).  The  count  was 
made,  and  two  were  missing,  when  our  lamented 
friend,  "  Tecolote,"  sung  out,  with  an  admirable 
mixture  of  confidence  and  sympathy,  pointing,  at 
the  same  time,  to  Ogden  and  myself  upon  the  floor, 
"  Here  is  two  muy  malo?  "Bueno"  (very  good) 
was  the  quick  reply  of  the  officer,  and  the  next 
moment  they  passed  out,  pulling  the  door  after  them 
with  a  heavy  crash.  The  like  operation  of  shut- 
ting the  door  in  the  left-hand  room  told  us  that 


316  DECEIVING    THE    SENTINEL. 

thus  far  we  had  succeeded  to  our  most  sanguine 
expectations. 

We  had  now  to  divert  the  attention  of  the  senti- 
nel at  the  door,  as  he  could,  by  standing  tiptoe  upon 
the  sill,  look  in  through  the  grates  at  our  operations. 
This  we  managed  to  great  perfection. 

We  first  made  the  fellow  good-natured  by  giving 
him  vino  mascal  through  the  grates  in  an  eggshell : 
nothing  larger  could  be  passed  through.  Next,  some 
of  our  men,  who  were  not  engaged  in  getting  out, 
spread  a  blanket  down  nearest  to  the  door,  on  which 
was  placed  two  candles,  and  four  or  five  engaged  in 
a  game  at  monte.  We  had  provided  the  players 
with  a  hatful  of  "  clacos"  square  pieces  of  soap  about 
one  and  a  half  inches  each,  with  the  stamp  of  the 
state,  or  person  issuing  them,  upon  the  sides,  and 
worth  one  and  a  half  cents  each.  Here  was  a 
brisk  game  kept  up,  to  the  greatest  possible  interest 
of  the  sentinel,  and,  to  enlist  him  still  more,  the  play- 
ers were  ordered  to  give  him  some  "clacos"  to  bet. 
He  would  pass  his  soap  through  the  grates,  and  di- 
rect upon  which  card  they  should  be  bet.  Of  all 
nations  under  the  sun,  the  Mexicans  are  the  most 
inveterate  gamblers  ;  and  though  the  monte  bank  was 
well  calculated  to  divert  him,  yet  the  necessary  noise 
we  had  to  make  in  passing  through  so  difficult  a  hole 
in  the  opposite  end  of  the  room  required  other  pre- 
cautions. 

Next  to  the  monte  bank,  some  eight  or  ten  were 
engaged  in  a  "  bull-dance,"  being  the  only  one  we 


COMMENCE    GOING    OUT.  317 

could  perform  in  our  "jewelry ;"  the  twenty  pound 
festoons  which  coupled  the  partners  not  being  well 
adapted  to  the  " chasse"  and  " balance"  they  had  to 
go  it  "  dos-a-dos."  They  danced  to  poor  "  Teco- 
lote's"  music,  who,  at  the  conclusion  of  every  set, 
would  either  give  his  inimitable  owl- whoop,  or  "  flap 
his  wings"  and  crow,  very  like  the  gamest  cock  that 
ever  graced  a  pit.  When  the  dancers  would  tire, 
there  were  others  ready  to  join  in  a  chorus  which 
drowned  all  our  noise.  Between  our  breach  and 
the  door  blankets  were  also  hung  up,  which  more 
effectually  hid  our  operations. 

At  seven  o'clock  we  commenced  our  final  prep- 
arations before  emerging  from  the  room.  This  was 
to  remove  the  shell  of  the  wall  yet  upon  the  outside, 
then  to  make  one  end  of  the  rope  fast  inside  of  the 
room,  and  pass  it  through,  by  which  we  would  have 
to  let  ourselves  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  moat. 
When  this  was  done,  it  was  found  that  the  breach 
was  too  small  upon  the  outside  to  admit  of  any  but 
the  smallest  of  our  men  passing  through  it,  and  re- 
quired two  hours  hard  work  to  scale  some  pieces  of 
stone  and  mortar  from  one  side  of  it,  so  as  to  permit 
the  larger  ones  to  pass.  This  required  until  nine 
o'clock. 

All  things  being  now  ready,  John  Too  wig,  a  gal- 
lant son  of  the  Emerald  Isle,  got  into  the  breach  feet 
foremost,  and,  drawing  his  bundle  after  him,  inch  by 
inch  squeezed  out,  and  let  himself  down  hand  over 
and  about  thirty  feet  to  the  bottom  of  the  moat. 


318  IKE    ALLEN    HAS    A    FALL. 

The  depth  and  smallness  of  the  hole  rendered  this 
operation  exceedingly  slow.  Another  and  another 
followed,  and  at  half  past  twelve,  after  three  hours 
and  a  half  hard  labour,  all  of  the  sixteen  had  safely 
landed. 

As  Isaac  Allen  (Ike,  for  short)  made  his  appear- 
ance upon  the  outer  aperture,  he  said,  "  Stand  from 
under,  boys ;  I  can't  say  whether  these  hands  are 
gwine  to  hold  ;"  and  no  sooner  said  than  the  laws  of 
gravity  landed  Ike  in  the  midst  of  us.  The  sand 
being  about  ankle-deep,  it  was  an  easy  fall,  and  he 
rose  as  if  nothing  unusual  had  occurred. 

Ike  previously  had  the  contents  of  his  gun  passed 
through  both  hands,  which  weakened  his  hold,  and 
was  the  cause  of  his  falling.  He  had  seen  much 
service  fighting  for  liberty  in  Texas,  had  been  in 
many  Indian  hunts,  and  had  met  danger  with  as  little 
fear  as  any  man.  It  was  one  of  his  chief  delights  to 
hate  the  Mexican  nation,  and  if  he  had  a  greater 
pleasure,  it  was  in  telling  the  Mexicans  of  it.  On 
account  of  the  crippled  condition  of  his  hands,  he 
had  been  separated  from  his  partners,  as  he  told  them 
that  "  his  hands  would  not  pack  stones,"  and  he  was 
permitted  to  wear  his  chain  single.  He,  on  one  of 
the  days  when  it  was  positively  forbidden  by  the 
governor  to  sell  us  aguardiente,  had  paid  his  devo- 
tions too  assiduously  to  a  certain  bladder  we  have 
had  occasion  to  speak  of,  when,  feeling  keenly  his 
own  and  his  country's  wrongs,  he  strutted  forth  in 
front  of  the  governor's  quarters,  singing  at  the  top  of 


"guts"  and  the  dialogue.  319 

his  voice,  "  Viva  la  Texas !"  (long  live  Texas  !)  The 
old  governor  came  out  in  the  greatest  rage,  and  sent 
for  "  Guts"  to  know  what  that  land  robber  meant  by 
insulting  him  in  that  manner;  and  threatened  "Guts" 
severely  on  account  of  his  getting  brandy.  Old 
"  Guts,"  full  of  wind  and  wrath,  brought  out  his 
guard  at  a  charge  bayonet,  and  rushed  Ike  off  to  the 
solitary  calaboose. 

"Now,"  says  Guts  to  Ike,  "you  bloody  robber! 
I  will  keep  you  here  until  you  rot,  unless  you  tell 
me  where  you  got  your  brandy  from." 

"  Well,"  says  Ike,  "  I  got  it  from  you." 

"  You  audacious  rascal !"  says  Guts,  "  how7  dare 
you  say  so  1     Don't  you  know  it  is  false  V 

"  Yes,"  says  Ike,  "  I  know  it  is  false,  Guts ;  but  I 
will  tell  the  governor  I  got  it  from  you ;  he  knows 
how  far  you  will  go  for  a  medio,  and  will  believe 
me ;  and  I  will  swear  it,  too,  on  the  largest  cross 
upon  the  Bible." 

"Not,"  says  Guts,  "upon  the  holy  cross?"  his  eyes 
dilating  with  horror  at  Ike's  heresy  and  the  fear  of 
the  governor. 

"  Yes,"  says  Ike,  "  I'll  be  if  I  don't,  Guts ; 

and,  what  is  more,  the  governor  will  give  you 

for  selling  me  the  aguardiente!' 

Ike's  rhetoric  was  convincing,  and  this  experimen- 
tum  crucis,  though  bold,  was  entirely  successful. 
Guts  swelled  with  anger,  then  thought  of  the  gov- 
ernor, then  paused,  and  then  opened  the  door  of 
the  calaboose,  and  said  to  Ike,  "  Go  out  of  here ! 


320  WASHING    OF    A    CAMISA. 

I'll  not  have  anything  to  do  with  such  a  heretic." 
What  tale  Guts  concocted  for  the  governor  we  know 
not. 

Ike  was  no  less  a  gallant  than  a  gallant  man. 
He  was  tall — women,  in  general,  like  tall  men 
best— and  wore  an  air  of  confident  nonchalance, 
which  bespoke  his  boldness — and  women  like  bold 
men  best.  It  was  not  strange,  therefore,  that  Ike 
should  have  been  a  favourite  with  the  ladies,  for 
with  them  he  had  more  credit  than  any  man  in  the 
ranks.  The  luxurious  Nina  would  always  credit 
Ike,  and  any  sergeant's  wife  in  the  castle  would  trust 
him  for  the  washing  of  his  camisa.  On  these  wash- 
ing days,  Ike,  having  but  one  shirt,  would  fold  his 
blanket  close  about  him  d  la  Mexican;  on  the  other 
days  his  Republicanism  made  him  wear  it  a  la  Texas. 

On  one  occasion  Ike  went  into  the  dormitory  of 
his  washerwoman  for  his  clean  shirt.  She  had  boil- 
ed it  so  well — boiling  was  necessary  to  prevent  the 
incubation  of  the  piojos  eggs — and  she  had  ironed 
it  so  smooth,  that  a  man  of  less  gallantry  than  Ike 
could  hardly  fail  expressing  his  profoundest  grati- 
tude therefor.  So,  after  sundry  bows,  he  commen- 
ced. "  Concedame,  Senora,  esta  gracia"  —  Madam, 
grant  me  this  favour ;  and,  suiting  the  action  to  the 
words,  impressed  a  tender  kiss  upon  the  cheek  of 
the  cabds  wife.  She,  thankful  for  the  condescen- 
sion, commenced  replying,  "  Lambre  de  mis  ojos"— 
Light  of  my  eyes,  when  in  popped  the  corporal, 
her  husband,  with  a  shoemaker's  awl  in  his  hand, 


WHY    IKE    WAS    STABBED.  321 

and,  not  waiting  for  an  explanation,  ran  furiously  at 
Ike,  and  "  socked"  it  in  the  thick  of  his  back  "smack 
up  to  the  handle." 

Ike,  never  so  little  dismayed  as  in  the  heat  of 
battle,  seized  this  petit  officer  by  the  collar,  and 
dragged  him  forth  in  front  of  our  prison  rooms,  call- 
ing at  the  top  of  his  voice  for  Lieutenant  Gomez, 
the  officer  of  the  guard.  Gomez  came  quickly  up. 
and  all  of  the  Texian  prisoners  gathered  around  Ike 
to  know  the  difficulty.  He  was  in  a  tremendous 
passion,  and  soon  explained  that  the  corporal  had 
stabbed  him  in  the  back. 

"What  for  Y[  exclaimed  twenty  of  his  indignant 
countrymen. 

"  Nothing  under  heaven,"  says  Ike,  "  but  my  re- 
turning thanks  to  his  wife  for  the  washing  of  my 
camisa" 

"How  returning  thanks?"  repeated  a  dozen  of 
his  comrades. 

"Why,"  says  Ike,  with  a  thundering  oath,  "can't 
you  thank  a  body  for  a  thing  V 

"  Yes ;  but  is  that  all  you  said  V 

"  As  God  is  my  judge  !"  replied  Ike,  with  increas- 
ed emphasis,  "  all  except  kissing  her." 

This  last  explanation  of  Ike's  filled  us  all  to  over- 
flowing with  laughter,  but  still  we  kept  it  in,  not 
knowing  the  extent  of  his  wound. 

The  officer  of  the  guard  was  still  not  satisfied, 
and  Ike  continued  in  his  most  passionate  tone, 
half  Spanish,  half  English,  and  swearing  that  he 

Ss 


322  EXTENT    OF    IKE's   WOUND. 

would  take  satisfaction  himself  of  the  corporal  un- 
less he  was  duly  punished. 

Lieutenant  Gomez  still  wanted  ocular  demonstra- 
tion of  the  injury,  when  Ike,  loosening  his  belt,  let 
fall  his  pantaloons  to  the  ground,  and  stooping  down, 
first  the  lieutenant,  and  then  we,  inspected  his  wound. 
Instead  of  finding  a  knife  or  sword  cut,  we  saw  the 
blood  oozing  from  an  orifice  the  size  of  a  brister- 
shot,  which  for  the  first  time  explained  to  us  that  he 
wTas  stabbed  with  a  cobbler's  awl ;  and,  turning  to 
the  affrighted  corporal,  still  in  the  clutches  of  Ike's 
left  hand,  saw  that  the  awl  had  only  gone  in  up  to 
the  handle,  and  not  more  than  two  inches  deep  at 
that. 

This  discovery,  and  the  farce  which  preceded  it 
and  was  still  going  on,  proved  a  matter  of  rare  mirth 
with  the  Texians ;  and  Gomez,  to  appease  Ike's 
wrath,  had  to  march  the  disconsolate  corporal  off  to 
the  calaboose,  leaving  the  wounded  caballero  behind 
to  explain  with  Senora  Cabo  how  innocent  a  thing 
it  was  "  to  return  thanks  for  the  washing  of  a  ca- 
misa."* 

*  Since  writing  the  above,  poor  Ike  has  paid  his  last  debt.  After  be- 
ing liberated  by  Santa  Anna  with  the  other  San  Antonio  prisoners,  he 
landed  in  Galveston  with  the  yellow  fever  in  June,  1844,  from  on  board 
the  United  States  war-steamer  Poinsett,  which  terminated  his  eventful 
life  at  about  thirty-five  years  of  age.  Quite  a  volume  might  be  written 
of  the  most  stirring  incidents  about  this  fearless  man.  He  had  some 
good  qualities  in  a  high  degree.  His  love  of  country  was  no  less  remark- 
able than  his  love  of  friends.  On  one  occasion,  when  he  had  a  friend 
killed  in  Bastrop  county,  Texas,  he  determined  to  avenge  his  death  ;  and 
while  the  person  charged  with  the  killing  was  upon  trial  in  open  court. 
Ike  went  in  and  fired  a  pistol-shot  at  his  head,  which,  though  not  proving 


ANECDOTE    OF    TOOWIG.  323 

John  Toowig  was  a  son  of  Old  Ireland,  a  small, 
energetic  man,  and  a  true-hearted  Republican.  His 
size  and  energy  both  befitting  the  operation  in  the 
hole,  he  had  done  more  than  his  share  of  the  work. 
He  was  the  same  who,  in  the  spring  of  1842,  at  San 
Antonia,  put  a  match  to  a  keg  of  powder  and  blew 
up  his  store,  with  several  thousand  dollars  worth  of 
goods,  rather  than  they  should  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  Mexican  General  Vascus.  It  was  less  difficult 
for  him  than  some  others  to  get  through  the  perfo- 
ration in  the  wall.  I  found  much  difficulty  in  pass- 
ing through,  though  I  was  now  reduced  from  one 
hundred  and  sixty  pounds,  my  usual  weight,  to  one 
hundred  and  twenty.  The  gradual  funnel-shape  of 
the  breach  made  it  like  driving  a  pin  into  an  auger- 
hole,  for  the  deeper  we  went,  the  closer  the  fit. 
The  smallest  of  us  having  gone  through  first,  for 
fear  that  the  largest  might  hang  in  the  hole  and 
stop  it  up,  it  now  came  to  Stone's  turn,  who  was  a 
large  man. 

He  hung  fast,  and  could  neither  get  backward  nor 
forward.     In  this  situation,  being  wedged  in  as  fast 

fatal,  wounded  more  than  one.  On  another  occasion,  at  San  Antonio,  in 
1837,  Dr.  G.  picked  a  quarrel  with  Ike,  which  resulted  in  the  death  of  the 
former.  Though  public  opinion  did  not  justify  the  manner  of  the  killing, 
yet  little  sympathy  was  felt  for  G.,  who  had  just  previously  wrongfully 
charged  young  Lawrence,  of  New-York,  with  stealing  his  money ;  and 
when  L.  demanded  satisfaction  for  the  injury,  killed  him  in  a  duel  De- 
forcing upon  the  party  challenging  the  use  of  the  rifle,  of  which  he  knew 
nothing.  The  death  of  the  highly-injured  and  amiable  young  Lawrence, 
who  fell  in  so  manly  a  defence  of  his  honour,  was  much  regretted  when 
it  was  afterward  known  that  the  real  thief  was  his  second  in  the  duel. 


324   STONE  AND  YOUNG  STICK  IN  THE  HOLE. 

as  his  giant  strength  could  force  him,  our  friends  on 
the  inside  of  the  room,  who  had  been  assisting  us, 
had  to  reach  in  the  hole,  tie  ropes  to  his  hands,  and 
draw  him  back.  This  operation  was  very  like  draw- 
ing his  arms  out  of  his  body,  but  did  not  satisfy  him. 
"  I  have  a  wife  and  children  at  home,"  says  he,  "  and 
I  would  rather  die  than  stay  here  longer :  I  will  go 
through,  or  leave  no  skin  upon  my  bones."  So  say- 
ing, he  disrobed  himself:  his  very  great  exertion,  caus- 
ing him  to  perspire  freely,  answered  nearly  as  well 
for  the  second  effort  as  if  he  had  been  greased,  and 
he  went  through  after  the  most  powerful  labour, 
leaving  both  skin  and  flesh  behind. 

John  Young,  if  anything,  was  a  larger  man  than 
Stone,  but  was  much  his  junior  in  years  :  he  was  as 
supple  as  a  snake,  and  no  Roman  gladiator  ever 
exhibited  more  perfectly-formed  muscles :  nor  was 
his  determined  temper  in  bad  keeping  with  his  phys- 
ical conformation.  He  was  the  last  that  came  out ; 
and  while  the  balance  of  us  sat  under  the  side  of 
the  wall,  we  feared  that  it  would  be  impossible  for 
him  to  get  through.  Presently,  with  the  aid  of  a 
dim  sky  above  us,  we  saw  his  feet  slowly  protruding, 
then  his  knees,  and  when  he  came  to  his  hip  joints, 
here  for  many  minutes  he  hung  fast.  When  this 
part  of  his  body  was  cleared,  the  angular  use  of  his 
knees  gave  him  additional  purchase  to  work  by  ;  but 
still  our  boys  said,  "  Poor  fellow  !  it  will  be  impos- 
sible to  get  his  muscular  arms  and  shoulders  through." 
We  sat  under  him  with  an  agony  of  feeling  not  to 


J    awfc-R   \       T5 

1 

' ' '/ 

If; 

|  ■ 

l 

PASSING    THE    SENTINELS.  325 

be  described,  while  he  ceased  not  his  efforts.  His 
body  was  now  cleared  to  his  shoulders,  but  still  he 
hung  fast.  Having  the  full  purchase  of  his  legs,  he 
would  writhe,  first  up  and  down,  and  then  from  side 
to  side,  with  Herculean  strength ;  and  when  he  dis- 
engaged himself,  if  it  was  not  like  the  drawing  of 
a  cork  from  a  porter-bottle,  it  was  with  the  low, 
sullen,  determined  growl  of  a  lion. 

Being  now  through  our  greatest  difficulty  about 
the  castle,  we  adjusted  carefully,  though  silently,  our 
knapsacks  and  blankets,  passing  orders  from  one  to 
another  in  low  whispers,  which  were  interrupted 
alone  by  the  almost  perpetual  cry  of '"  centinela  alertd' 
of  the  sentinels  above  us,  both  upon  the  right  and 
left  bastions,  and  between  which  we  had  now  to 
pass.  The  moon  had  gone  down  at  8  o'clock; 
and  being  favoured  by  the  darkness  in  the  bot- 
tom of  the  moat,  through  which  the  sentinels  over- 
head could  not  penetrate,  we  slowly  crossed  over  to 
the  outer  wall  in  Indian  file,  then  felt  along  the  wall 
until  we  came  to  a  fi^gjal  of  narrow  steps  eighteen 
inches  wide,  up  which  we  crawled  upon  all-fours. 
When  we  reached  the  top  of  the  wall,  which  form- 
ed the  outer  side  of  the  moat,  we  passed  on  to  the 
chevaux  de  frize,  which  was  about  twelve  feet  high, 
of  pointed  timbers  set  upright  in  the  ground.  These 
upright  timbers  passed  through  a  horizontal  sill  about 
six  feet  from  the  ground,  which  we  could  reach  with 
our  hands,  and  then  pull  ourselves  up,  from  which 
we  could  then  climb  over  the  sharp  points  of  the 


326  HAILING    OF    THE    SENTINELS. 

upright  posts,  thence  down  to  the  bottom  of  the 
outside  ditch,  up  the  outside  bank  of  which  we 
crawled,  it  not  being  walled.  When  we  reached 
the  top  we  breathed  more  freely,  for  we  were  now 
in  the  wide  world,  and  felt  more  like  freemen  ;  and 
as  the  sentinels  drolled  out  their  sleepy  notes  of 
" centinela  alerta"  we  jumped  up,  and  cracked  our 
heels  together  three  times,  as  a  substitute  for  cheers 
three  times  three. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

RESIDENCE  IN  THE  MOUNTAINS,  AND  ENTRY  INTO  JALAPA. 

Two  hundred  Yards  east  of  the  Castle. — Separation. — Parting  Speeches. 
— Pass  the  Powder-house. — Meet  with  Reese  and  Toowig. — Divide 
Rations  with. — Take  to  the  Mountains. — Residence  and  Sufferings  in 
— Return  to  the  Valley. — Charge  of  Cavalry  and  Escape. — Separation 
from  Toowig. — Narrow  Escape  from  a  Precipice. — Make  Coffee. — Ap- 
proach to  Jalapa. — Our  Distress  from  Sore  Feet  and  Thorns. — Entry 
and  Peregrination  in  the  City. — Our  Location  in  the  Suburbs. — Re- 
entry, mode  of. — Don  :  his  Wife,  and  warm  Supper. — Meet  Toowig. 
— Residence  in  City. — Kind  Treatment. — Robbers  employed,  and  we 
delivered  over  to  them  in  a  dark  Hollow. 

As  the  castle  bell  tolled  "  half  past  twelve,"  we 
were  in  the  open  common,  about  two  hundred  yards 
east  of  the  outer  ditch.  Here  we  had  to  await  the 
return  of  Ike  Allen,  who  had  gone  ahead  with  Cap- 
tain Reese,  Ogden,  and  Toowig,  on  the  following 
account : 

Reese,  Ogden,  and  Toowig,  who  were  more  flush 


SEPARATION.  327 

of  funds  than  the  balance  of  us,  had,  previous  to 
leaving  the  castle,  perfected  an  arrangement,  through 
a  friend  living  at  a  considerable  distance  from  Pe- 
rote,  to  have  a  confidential  guide  and  three  extra 
horses  near  by  on  this  night.  The  guide  was  to 
kindle  a  fire  as  a  signal,  one  mile  east  of  the  castle, 
between  the  hours  of  ten  and  one,  at  which  fire 
they  were  to  have  met ;  then  to  ride  with  relays  of 
horses,  and  get  into  Vera  Cruz  ahead  of  the  alarm. 
The  guide,  as  we  afterward  learned,  came  to  the 
place,  but  owing  to  some  shepherds  astir  in  the 
neighbourhood,  they  failed  to  kindle  the  fire  through 
fear  of  discovery.  Ike  had  accompanied  these  gen- 
tlemen to  the  appointed  place  to  meet  a  second 
guide,  who  was  promised  just  previously  to  this  time 
to  be  there  on  foot,  and  to  conduct  us  a  blind  way 
through  the  mountains  to  the  seacoast  near  Vera 
Cruz,  at  a  place  where  vessels  occasionally  anchor 
off  to  water.  Here  the  balance  of  us  were  to  be  se- 
creted until  our  sailing  arrangements  were  com- 
plete. The  signal-fire  failing,  Ogden  and  Ike  re- 
turned, leaving  Reese  and  Toowig  still  in  search  of 
the  promised  guide. 

We  were  now  thrown  back  upon  our  original 
plan  of  escaping  in  pairs,  and  after  shaking  hands, 
and  wishing  each  other  a  safe,  if  not  a  pleasant  jour- 
ney, we  separated  in  the  following  manner : 

Little  Tom  Hancock  and  Forester  were  consid- 
ered the  best  walkers  in  the  crowd.  Tom  was  a 
great  woodsman ;  he  had  the  organ  of  the  honey- 


328  PARTING    SPEECHES. 

bee  in  a  high  degree,  and  facing  himself  to  the  north- 
east, then  looking  over  his  left  shoulder  to  the  north 
star,  so  as  to  form  an  acute  angle  to  that  luminary, 
he  pointed  his  sapote  staff  dead  ahead,  and  said, 
"  Boys,  this  will  bring  me  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico, 
and  then  I  shall  know  where  I  am.  I  will  have 
nothing  to  do  but  to  follow  round  the  left  of  the 
pond  to  Texas."  Thus  saying,  Tom  and  Forester 
started,  and  Captain  Ogden,  being  disappointed  in 
his  horse  arrangement,  went  with  them. 

Ike,  facing  a  little  more  north  than  Tom,  but  still 
keeping  the  north  star  upon  his  left,  said,  "  Boys, 
this  will  bring  the  Rio  Grande,  where  I  am  well  ac- 
quainted with  every  path  and  crossing,  and  about 
this  time  my  cattle  and  mules  are  in  good  driving 
condition,  so  God  bless  you  all."  Thus  saying,  he 
moved  forward,  his  two  comrades  following. 

The  Herculean  John  Young,  who  stood  well 
built  and  six  feet  two  under  a  slouched  hat  and 
thirty  pounds  of  fat  bacon,  split  the  difference  be- 
tween Tom  and  Ike.  He  was  a  man  of  but  few 
words,  and  saying,  "A  thousand  miles  this  course 
will  reach  Texas — that's  nothing,"  he  and  his  chums 
started. 

Dick  Barclay  had  much  of  the  polarity  quality  in 
his  composition.  His  frequent  Indian  hunts  in 
Texas  had  well  tested  his  locality  organ,  and  he 
struck  a  course  still  east  of  Tom,  his  comrade  fol- 
lowing in  silence. 

Dalrymple  was  left  alone,  his  partner  having  de- 


- 


PASS    THE    POWDER-HOUSE.  329 

clined  coming ;  he  said,  "  Well,  boys,  here  is  for  the 
city  of  Mexico,"  and  obliqued  to  the  right  for  the 
main  stage-road. 

Myself  and  Dan  took  the  other  end  of  the  road 
for  Vera  Cruz.  My  plan  was  to  pursue  it  rapidly 
until  daylight,  and  then  turn  into  the  mountains  of 
Cofre  de  Perote,  which  lay  upon  our  right. 

In  leaving  the  castle,  our  friend  Major  Bugg  prom- 
ised to  fold  up  a  dirty-looking  blanket,  as  near  the 
colour  of  the  wall  as  possible,  and  so  fill  in  the  hole, 
as  the  breach  upon  the  outside  could  not  be  easily 
discovered.  Thus  we  had  every  confidence  that  our 
escape  would  not  be  known  before  counting  time  at 
nine  o'clock  next  day.  Consequently,  I  pursued  the 
road  with  no  fear  of  arrest  that  night;  the  only 
probability  was  that  we  might  meet  with  some  rob- 
bers. We  passed  along  the  road  at  a  brisk  walk, 
occasionally  stooping  low,  surveying  the  horizon  to 
see  whether  any  one  was  moving.  When  we  reach- 
ed the  powder-house,  as  the  "  molino  de  polvora"  was 
called  by  us  Texians,  which  was  three  miles  from 
the  castle,  many  dogs  of  "  low  degree"  flew  out  as 
if  they  would  certainly  take  us.  From  experience, 
we  knew  how  cowardly  were  the  Mexican  dogs, 
and  kept  our  way,  only  balancing  our  sapotes  in  our 
hands  in  case  of  necessity. 

About  five  miles  farther  on  we  came  to  a  brisk 
little  creek,  running  over  a  bed  of  round  pebbles. 
Here  we  laid  down  to  drink  ;  and  while  quaffing  the 
pure  mountain  liquid,  we  heard  a  noise  in  the  road 

Tt 


330    DIVIDE    RATIONS    WITH    REESE    AND    TOOWIG. 

from  the  direction  in  which  we  came  as  though  some 
persons  were  in  pursuit.  Having  the  advantage  of 
the  horizon,  from  our  stooping  position  we  could 
soon  see  two  figures  approaching  to  within  a  few 
feet  of  us,  and  as  I  gathered  a  round  stone  in  each 
hand,  and  was  in  the  act  of  throwing,  one  of  them 
hailed  in  English, "  Who's  there  1"  We  at  once  knew 
it  to  be  Reese's  voice,  and  was  greatly  rejoiced  that 
he  spoke  so  soon,  as  we  intended  first  to  fire,  and 
then  to  tail.  It  was  Reese  and  Too  wig,  who,  hav- 
ing been  disappointed  in  finding  the  guide  and  horses, 
were  now  thrown  upon  their  own  resources,  and 
without  provisions,  for  the  guide  was  to  have  fur- 
nished them. 

Very  fortunately,  Dan  ana  myself  were  supplied 
with  twenty  days'  rations  each,  and  we  divided  with 
them.  We  pursued  the  road  several  miles  farther, 
passing  a  large  hacienda,  and  every  variety  of  "  bark- 
ing dogs,"  until  we  heard  a  noise  ahead.  Stooping 
down,  we  saw  some  persons  in  the  road,  and  it  being 
near  daylight,  concluded  to  turn  off  to  the  right  and 
make  for  the  mountains. 

The  only  kind  of  shoes  we  could  procure  in  the 
castle  was  a  thin  kind  of  goatskin  slippers,  only  fit 
to  be  kept  dry  and  worn  in  the  house.  In  a  little 
time,  walking  through  the  wet  grass,  they  would 
stretch  and  come  to  pieces.  Our  feet  not  only  suf- 
fered from  the  sharp  mountain  stones,  but  we  had 
become  greatly  enervated  from  our  prison  life,  and 
our  fatigue  was  excessive.     Those  who  had  labour- 


SUFFERINGS    IN    THE    MOUNTAINS.  331 

ed  in  the  castle  could  stand  the  fatigue  much  the 
best.  Before  it  was  fairly  light  we  had  ascended 
the  mountains  so  high  that  we  left  all  the  settlements 
below,  and  a  brisk  rain  which  had  fallen  had  not 
only  thoroughly  drenched  us,  but  it  also  rendered 
our  pursuit  impossible,  by  obliterating  our  tracks. 
After  we  had  got  so  high  into  the  mountains  as  only 
here  and  there  to  see  the  traces  of  the  shepherd,  or 
the  sign  where  some  Peon  had  burned  his  charcoal 
for  market,  we  selected  a  dark  cove  and  lay  down 
to  rest. 

With  the  assistance  of  our  map  and  a  pocket 
compass  we  knew  our  general  course,  and  started 
before  sundown,  but  the  almost  bottomless  ravines 
and  inaccessible  mountains  succeeded  each  other 
so  quickly  that  our  progress  was  slow  and  fatiguing 
beyond  anything  we  had  yet  experienced.  Wind- 
ing around  the  base  of  a  mountain,  the  perpendicular 
sides  of  which  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  as- 
cend, we  would  come  to  an  abyss,  down  the  sides  of 
which  we  would  have  to  feel  our  way,  inch  by  inch, 
with  the  greatest  caution,  which  much  retarded  our 
general  progress.  This  was  the  work  of  evenings, 
nights,  and  mornings.  At  length  our  provisions  were 
becoming  rapidly  diminished,  and  we  determined  to 
descend  into  the  lowlands. 

This  was  during  the  "  rainy  season,"  for  in  Mex- 
ico it  rains  nearly  all  the  time  from  June  to  Octo- 
ber ;  consequently  we  were  nearly  all  the  time  wet. 
If  we  caught  enough  sun  about  the  middle  of  the 


332  RETURN  TO  THE  VALLEY. 

day  to  dry  us,  it  was  to  be  succeeded  by  another 
drenching  at  night,  which,  in  that  snowy  region, 
made  us  suffer  intensely  from  cold.  The  constant 
rains  made  the  mountain  sides  nearly  as  slippery 
as  soap ;  this  made  our  way  still  more  difficult. 
Where  such  heavy  labour  was  performed,  much 
drinking  of  water  was  necessary,  and  the  rains  fur- 
nished this  blessing  iu  abundance.  We  would  drink 
at  every  brook,  and  fill  our  gourds,  which  would  last 
to  the  next. 

Having  descended  many  miles  the  valley  of  a 
bold  creek,  which,  from  our  map,  we  judged  to  be 
the  head  of  a  river  leading  through  the  Valley  of 
Jalapa,  we  crawled  into  some  bushes  after  daylight 
to  sleep.  Here  we  were  first  aroused  by  a  heavy 
rain  and  several  shepherd  boys,  who  came  so  near 
that  it  would  seem  impossible  for  them  not  to  have 
seen  us.  We  lay  as  close  to  the  ground  as  if  we 
had  been  so  many  snakes,  but  watched  closely  their 
countenances  :  had  they  discovered  us,  we  would 
have  emigrated  sooner  than  our  regular  hour.  We 
were  in  a  valley  which  now  rapidly  descended,  and 
about,  sundown  we  again  took  up  our  march.  Soon 
we  struck  a  path,  but  its  precipitous  descent  and  rich 
black  soil,  made  in  the  highest  possible  degree  slip- 
pery from  the  continued  rains,  rendered  our  descent, 
if  possible,  more  fatiguing  than  the  ascent.  Our 
feet  and  legs  skinned,  swelled,  and  excessively  sore, 
with  the  general  stiffness  of  limbs,  "  rusted  with  a 
vile  repose,"  and  a  great  want  of  muscular  action 


A    FORCED    GUIDE.  333 

from  cold  and  rains,  we  had  but  little  power  of  hold- 
ing back,  and  frequently  slipped  and  fell  with  great 
violence. 

At  daylight  we  were  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  a  thick  settlement,  and  took  lodging  in 
some  bushes  and  weeds  upon  an  elevation,  from 
which  we  could  see  below  us  people  cultivating 
their  fields.  Here  we  waited  until  near  night,  when 
we  again  set  forth.  Descending  into  the  valley  still 
below,  and  crossing  a  small  field,  we  met  a  Peon 
with  a  hoe  upon  his  shoulder,  returning  from  labour. 
This  poor  fellow  was  exceedingly  alarmed,  but  af- 
ter our  assuring  him  that  we  intended  no  harm,  we 
asked  him  the  way  to  Jalapa.  He  commenced  a 
difficult  direction,  when  we  determined  to  take  him 
with  us  as  a  guide  at  least  part  of  the  way ;  then 
ordering  him  to  go  ahead,  he  led  us  down  a  bold 
creek  about  two  miles  to  a  crossing,  and  then  told 
us  to  take  the  right-hand  end  of  the  road,  which 
would  lead  us  to  the  molina,  and  thence  to  the  city. 
We  gave  him  a  piece  of  silver,  and  he  took  the 
other  end,  much  relieved  from  his  alarm,  which  our 
outlandish  appearance  occasioned.  The  right-hand 
end  led  immediately  across  the  creek  and  through 
a  gap,  with  a  high  mountain  on  each  hand.  We 
had  proceeded  but  a  few  hundred  yards,  Toowig 
and  Reese  in  advance  of  Dan  about  fifty  yards,  and 
he  in  advance  of  me  about  fifty  yards,  my  feet  being 
badly  swollen  and  skinned,  and  distressingly  sore, 
and  I  hobbling  on  at  a  tedious  gait,  when  I  discov- 


334  CHARGE    OF    CAVALRY    AND    ESCAPE. 

ered  four  ranchero  cavalry  emerging  from  the  gap 
in  the  mountains  through  which  we  had  to  pass, 
and  coming  immediately  towards  us.  I  hallooed  to 
my  comrades  to  look  to  the  front,  but  by  this  time 
they  had  met,  saluted  the  caballeros  with  apparent 
confidence,  and  passed  on.  Dan  did  the  same,  and 
I  followed  suit  with  the  best  of  my  poor  Spanish. 
I  kept  my  eye  well  over  my  shoulder  to  watch  their 
motions. 

When  they  had  passed  about  one  hundred  yards, 
they  wheeled  their  horses'  heads  together,  and,  after 
a  hurried  and  very  excited  consultation,  dashed  back 
upon  me  in  full  charge.  I  called  my  comrades  to 
return  to  my  assistance — that  these  fellows  were 
charging  upon  me,  at  the  same  time  facing  them, 
and  mixing  up  in  an  angry  tone  the  worst  Spanish 
and  English  oaths.  The  only  weapons  I  had  upon 
my  person  were  my  tongue  and  sapote  walking- 
stick  ;  the  first  I  freely  used,  and  the  other  I  held  in 
reserve  for  close  quarters  ;  but,  as  Providence  would 
have  it,  the  fate  of  war  had  now  halted  me  in  the 
midst  of  a  rich  supply  of  thro  wing-stones,  and  I  did 
not  consider  the  odds  very  unequal.  Had  I  turned 
my  back  upon  these  knights,  I  should  have  fallen  an 
easy  prey  under  their  cutlasses  ;  this  I  knew,  and  I 
determined  to  fight  it  out  upon  the  spot.  The 
foremost  of  these  fellows  had  by  this  time  reached 
within  fifteen  or  eighteen  steps  of  my  position,  and 
the  instant  I  expected  the  battle  to  commence,  he 
filed  suddenly  to  the  left,  the  others  following  at 


SEPARATION   FROM   TOOWIG.  335 

full  speed.  They  dismounted  in  great  haste  at  a 
house  some  hundred  yards  opposite  me,  as  I  judged, 
for  the  purpose  of  procuring  re-enforcements. 

I  turned  to  look  after  my  comrades.  They,  nor 
understanding  what  I  said  when  I  called  to  them, 
and  believing  that  these  fellows  were  the  advance 
of  a  stronger  force,  had  dashed  into  the  thick  mount- 
ain brush,  Toowig  upon  the  right,  and  Dan  and 
Reese  upon  the  left  of  the  road.  I  hurried  on,  and 
went  into  the  same  place  where  I  had  seen  the  two 
last  enter.  Here  I  found  them,  and  we  scrambled 
up  a  precipice  too  steep  for  cavalry  to  follow,  and 
lay  down  under  some  thick  bushes  to  rest.  Dark 
came  on  before  these  fellows  could  complete  their 
preparations  for  pursuit ;  and  after  resting,  and  giving 
our  private  whistle  for  Toowig,  whom  we  could  not 
bring  up,  we  set  out  in  a  different  course,  leaving 
the  Peon's  direction  to  our  right. 

Our  course  this  night  was  over  an  excessively 
broken  country,  alternate  mountains  and  valleys  of 
exceeding  height  and  fearful  depth.  Briers,  thorn- 
bushes,  and  sharp  stones  impeded  our  progress,  and 
made  the  labour  of  the  foremost  much  the  most  dif- 
ficult. Accordingly,  we  alternately  took  the  lead. 
When  it  came  to  my  turn  to  lead,  we  fell  into  a 
path  comparatively  level,  which  we  pursued  several 
hundred  yards,  the  end  of  my  walking-stick  always 
ahead  of  me  about  two  feet,  feeling  the  way.  At 
length  I  felt  no  bottom,  and  from  habit  stopped  as 
quick  as  thought,  not  making  another  step,  at  the 


336  NARROW    ESCAPE    FROM    A    PRECIPICE. 

same  time  speaking  to  my  companions  behind  to  halt. 
Stooping  down  where  I  stood,  with  my  walking-cane  I 
reached  as  far  as  my  arm  would  allow,  but  still  I  found 
no  bottom  ;  and,  after  laying  down  and  straining  our 
eyes,  we  discovered  the  appearance  of  tree  tops  far 
below.  Changing  our  course,  w7e  felt  our  way  down 
a  steep  descent  of  at  least  one  mile  to  a  valley,  the 
creek  through  which  washed  the  base  of  the  danger- 
ous precipice  we  had  just  escaped.  How  inscruta- 
ble are  the  ways  of  Providence !  One  step  more, 
myself,  then  Reese,  and  then  Dan  would  have  fallen 
a  thousand  feet — for  no  alarm  from  the  foremost 
would  have  reached  the  next— leaving  no  one  on 
earth  a  knowledge  of  our  destiny. 

Having  passed  through  several  cultivated  fields  in 
this  dark  valley — for,  when  we  looked  back  upon 
our  frightful  escape,  we  likened  it  to  the  "  Valley  of 
Death" — daylight  found  us  again  lying  under  our 
wet  blankets  in  some  thick  bushes.  We  rested  a 
few  hours,  being  much  exhausted,  and  suffering 
greatly  for  want  of  refreshment.  We  had  coffee  and 
chocolate  in  our  knapsacks,  but  for  fear  of  raising 
smokes  we  had  only  on  one  occasion  used  any. 
Hearing  the  roaring  of  a  cataract  at  some  distance 
below,  we  determined  to  get  water,  seek  a  dark  and 
secure  place,  and  make  coffee.  We  traced  the  roar- 
ing of  this  waterfall,  and  found  it  at  the  bottom  of  a 
dark  and  deep  hollow,  overlapped  with  a  thick  foli- 
age. From  the  brink  of  the  hill  no  one  could  be 
seen  below,  while  we  below  could  easily  discover 


APPROACH    TO    JALAPA.  337 

the  approach  of  any  one  from  above.  Here  we 
made  a  small  fire,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  our 
pint  tin,  we  made  cup  after  cup,  until  we  were 
greatly  relieved.  The  roar  of  the  waters  prevented 
our  being  heard,  and  we,  after  bathing  our  feet  and 
legs,  luxuriated  in  a  good  chat,  for  most  of  our  in- 
tercourse had  been  carried  on  by  signs  and  low 
whispers,  which  had  become  irksome. 

From  the  distance  and  general  course  we  had 
travelled,  we  believed  that  we  were  not  many  miles 
from  the  city  of  Jalapa,  and  the  paths  all  converg- 
ed in  the  direction  which  we  believed  the  city  lay. 
Before  night  we  left  our  cooking  place,  and  skirted 
along  the  cultivated  fields,  avoiding  the  paths,  as  we 
expected  the  different  entrances  to  the  city  wrould 
be  guarded.  We  had  not  gone  many  miles  before 
the  ringing  of  the  city  bells  could  be  plainly  heard ; 
and  having  understood  that  the  city  lay  in  a  valley 
between  two  mountains,  which  were  now  plainly 
seen  in  the  bright  moonlight  upon  our  right  and  left, 
we  for  the  first  time  understood  our  precise  locality. 
Our  plan  was  now  to  leave  the  city  to  our  right,  and 
follow  round  the  base  of  the  mountain  to  our  left ; 
strike  into  the  valley  of  the  river,  which  our  map 
showed  led  to  the  seacoast,  thence  follow  it  down. 

We  bore  to  the  left  to  avoid  the  city,  and  cross- 
ing many  stone  fences  covered  with  prickly-pear 
and  briers,  which  surround  the  little  cornfields, 
were  sorely  lacerated.  The  more  we  tried  to  avoid 
the  city,  the  thicker,  it  appeared  to  us,  became  the 

Uu 


338  PEREGRINATIONS    IN    THE    CITY. 

settlements ;  and  a  succession  of  these  small  fields 
and  stone  fences  for  several  miles  exasperated  us  to 
a  degree  which  made  us  indifferent  to  the  conse- 
quences. We  determined  then  to  strike  south  into 
the  heart  of  the  city,  and  play  our  game  boldly. 

Of  all  nations,  the  Mexicans  are  most  devoted  to 
bells,  to  which  they  attach  much  superstition,  their 
cities  being  filled  with  them,  and  of  which  they  make 
a  perpetual  use.  Their  constant  ringing  during  our 
peregrination  in  the  neighbourhood  told  us  how  the 
city  lay,  and  we  had  no  difficulty  in  striking  through 
its  centre.  By  Indian  file  we  passed  up  one  street 
and  down  another,  under  our  broadbrim  ranchero 
hats,  with  our  shoulders  and  knapsacks  covered  with 
our  darkly-variegated  blankets,  which  we  had  been 
careful  in  procuring  before  leaving  the  castle.  To 
the  frequent  " quien  viva'  of  the  sentinels  we  made 
no  reply,  but  kept  our  course  in  silence.  It  appear- 
ed to  us  that  there  were  more  dogs  in  this  town  than 
we  had  ever  before  seen  at  one  place ;  and  though 
they  barked  in  an  angry  tone,  as  if  they  knew  us  to 
be  strangers,  yet  they  kept  at  a  respectful  distance 
from  our  sapotes. 

We  had  been  reconnoitring  the  city  for  three 
hours,  and  as  daylight  drew  near  we  determined  to 
go  a  short  distance  south  and  select  a  lodging  for 
the  next  day,  which  would  overlook  the  whole  place. 
In  the  southern  suburb  of  the  town  we  found  a  po- 
sition admirably  suited  to  our  views.  It  was  an 
insulated  conical  mound,  such  as  are  frequently  seen 


LAYING    SPOON    FASHION.  339 

in  the  valleys  of  Mexico,  rising  out  of  this  valley  to 
several  hundred  feet,  and  covered  with  high  weeds 
and  brush.  Upon  the  apex  of  this  cone  we  took 
our  lodging,  not  judging,  from  the  appearance  of 
the  weeds,  that  it  was  often  ascended.  Here,  in 
our  wet  clothes  and  blankets — for  we  had  just  had 
the  benefit  of  a  cold,  drenching  rain — we  lay  down 
upon  the  wet  ground,  as  close  together  as  we  could 
get,  and  spread  our  wet  blankets  over  us,  covering 
us  entirely  up.  The  steam  which  our  respiration 
created  under  the  wet  blankets  soon  warmed  us,  and 
the  greatest  distress  we  experienced  was  in  turning 
over;  for  in  laying  together  as  compact  as  three 
spoons,  this  had  to  be  done  at  one  time,  and  by 
common  consent.  In  these  turnings  the  cold  air 
would  rush  in,  and  the  change  it  would  produce  in 
our  feelings,  if  not  a  good  illustration  of  the  collap- 
sing of  a  steam  boiler,  explained  the  philosophy  of 
some  of  the  northern  nations  wetting  their  cover- 
ings to  keep  them  warm  at  night. 

We  remained  in  this  situation  until  ten  o'clock 
next  day,  when  we  rose  to  take  our  position  to  sur- 
vey the  city  below.  Here  we  studied  its  geography 
until  night,  many  persons  passing  near  the  foot  of 
the  hill,  but  no  one  ascending  it.  As  soon  as  it  was 
dark  we  started  into  the  city,  and  coming  to  a  di- 
lapidated church  upon  the  right  of  the  street,  around 
which  grew  some  high  weeds,  Reese  and  myself 
seated  ourselves  by  the  side  of  the  wall  in  the  weeds, 
and  sent  Dan  ahead.     He  was  to  pick  up  some 


340  THE    DON  :    AND    A    WARM    SUPPER. 

common  looking  Mexican,  and  give  him  a  real  to 
conduct  him  to  the  house  of  our  friend.  Dan  had 
not  proceeded  far  before  he  employed  a  suitable 
guide,  which  his  knowledge  of  the  language  render- 
ed easy.    In  reaching  the  door  of  our  friend,  he,  with 

a  cunning  wink,  said  to  Don ,  as  he  opened  it, 

"I  have  brought  your  watch,  which  your  brother  sent 
up  from  Vera  Cruz."  "Ah,"  says  the  Don,  "come 
in ;"  and,  shutting  the  door  after  him,  a  word  ex- 
plained who  he  was,  and  that  myself  and  Reese 
were  by  the  side  of  the  old  church.  The  Don  put 
on  his  blanket,  and  came  down  with  our  concerted 
signal;  he  gave  the  true  sign;  we  followed  him  in 
silence,  and  when  wre  entered  his  house,  found  his 
good  sefiora  preparing  a  warm  supper,  with  a  most 
delightful  toddy  ready  mixed. 

Those,  and  those  alone,  who  have  experienced 
like  suffering,  may  form  a  reasonable  estimate  of  our 
present  happiness  :  once  more  under  a  kind  roof, 
with  a  smoking  supper  before  us — what  inexpress- 
ible felicity ! 

We  were  conducted  after  supper  to  a  secret 
hiding-place,  where  we  found  Too  wig  carefully 
ensconced,  having  gotten  into  the  city  one  night 
ahead  of  us.  This  was  the  first  intelligence  we 
had  of  him  since  we  separated  in  the  mountains 
three  nights  previous.  Here  we  remained  five  days, 
and  were  treated  with  a  kindness  by  these  good 
people  we  never  shall  forget.  Mexican  women  are 
kind-hearted  to  a  degree,  which  makes  their  good- 


ROBBERS  EMPLOYED.  341 

ness  contrast  singularly  with  the  vices  of  the  men. 
Our  feet  and  legs  were  bathed  and  poulticed  ;  and 
we  sent  out  and  purchased  good  shoes,  and  all  the 
paraphernalia  of  the  mountain  ranchero,  prepara- 
tory to  our  farther  journey.  Here  we  luxuriated 
in  a  great  variety  of  tropical  fruits  grown  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  by  the  sixth  night  we  had  be- 
come so  far  resuscitated  from  our  mountain  fatigues 
as  to  be  able  to  proceed. 

Don ,  whose  name  we  regret  the  improprie- 
ty of  mentioning,  as  it  would  doubtless  occasion  him 
persecution  from  his  government,  was  known  to  us 
from  a  long  negotiation.  No  one  knew  better  than 
he  the  country  and  its  inhabitants,  from  Santa  Anna 
down  to  every  mountain  robber  of  decent  reputa- 
tion. His  pride  was  greatly  enlisted  in  our  success, 
and  he  had  ample  means  of  assisting  us. 

At  10  o'clock  of  the  sixth  night,  the  Don  said  to 
us,  "  Prepare  to  follow  me,  and  ask  no  questions." 
We  did  so,  and  he  led  us  through  the  city  into  a 
dark  valley  about  two  miles  off,  and  after  telling  us 
to  hide  in  the  bushes,  he  went  about  one  hundred 
yards  farther  down  the  hollow,  and  bringing  a  shrill 
whistle,  a  tall,  well-made,  active  man,  about  thirty- 
five  years  of  age,  came  to  him.  A  very  few  words 
were  passed  between  them,  they  having  been  to- 
gether the  night  previous,  and  perfected  all  arrange- 
ments. The  moon  shone  bright ;  they  came  in  the 
direction  of  where  we  were  concealed  in  the  shade 
of  some  bushes,  and  called  to  us   to   come  forth. 


342  DELIVERED    OVER    TO    THE    ROBBERS. 

"  This  man,"  said  the  Don,  "  you  must  follow,  but 
ask  no  questions.  My  express  ahead  will  complete 
every  arrangement  for  you  in  Vera  Cruz,  and  be 
under  no  alarm  as  to  the  result ;  this  man  knows  his 
business."  Both  the  place  and  circumstances  wore 
much  the  air  of  mystery :  it  looked  like  "  treason, 
stratagem,"  and  murder ;  and  to  our  question,  "  Might 
not  this  fellow  betray  us  for  the  reward  1"  "  No," 
says  the  Don  ;  "  /  have  looked  to  that.  He,"  point- 
ing to  our  conductor,  "  is  the  most  noted  robber  and 
murderer  in  Mexico,  and  is  in  more  danger  of  lo- 
sing his  head  than  you.  He  dare  not  show  himself 
to  the  authorities."  Thus  saying,  we  took  affec- 
tionate leave  of  the  generous  Don,  he  returning  to 
the  city,  and  we  following  our  silent  conductor  down 
the  hollow. 


HEAD    ROBBER.  343 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

FIVE  NIGHTS'  JOURNEY  TO  VERA  CRUZ  UNDER  CONDUCT 
OF  ROBBERS. 

Head  Robber.— Coming  to  the  Horses.— Signal.— Silence.— Winding 
around  Precipices. — Narrow  Paths. — Sure-footed  Animals. — Puente 
Nacional. — Rio  Antigua. — Lying  in  Swamp. — Hot  Breakfast. — Lodg- 
ed in  vacant  House. — Gray-bearded  old  Man. — Meeting  Robbers. — 
Enter  Antigua. — Cavalry  Officer  and  the  Gray-bearded  old  Man. — 
Narrow  Escape  from  the  Officers  and  Guards. — Crossing  the  Ferry, 
and  deceiving  the  Officer. — The  Gray-bearded  old  Man's  Exultation. — 
Taking  the  Road  to  Manga  de  Clavo. — Secreted  for  the  Night. — Head 
Robber  goes  into  Vera  Cruz. — Our  Location  next  Day. — Vessels  at 
Sea. — Sand  Storm. — Head  Robber  arrives  with  Don  E. — Start  for  the 
City. — Storm  and  Separation. — Arrival  near  the  City  Gates. — Suspi- 
cions of  the  Head  Robber. — Bad  Night. — Don  E.  finds  us  next  Day. — 
Our  Entry  into  the  City. — Parting  with  Robbers. — Valedictory  of  the 
Gray-bearded  old  Man. — Our  Hiding-place. — United  States  Friends. — 
Dick  Barclay. — Recapture  of  our  Comrades. — A  Look  into  the  Castle 
after  the  Denouement. — Surprise,  "Wonder,  and  Astonishment. — The 
Governor,  Guts,  and  the  Children. 

Silently,  and  in  single  file,  we  followed  our  dark- 
looking  conductor  down  the  hollow,  and  in  a  dismal- 
looking  place,  in  a  second  ravine,  we  came  upon 
his  companion,  holding  by  the  bridle  five  mules  and 
horses.  A  whistle  and  an  answer  told  that  all  was 
right.  The  head  man  placed  a  bridle  into  each  of 
our  hands  without  saying  a  word,  then  drew  from 
his  goatskin  bag  a  bottle,  out  of  which  he  drank,  to 
satisfy  us  that  it  was  not  poison ;  then  passing  it  to 
us,  we  all  drank,  and  returned  it.  Stowing  it  care- 
fully away,  he  turned  to  the  east,  and  placing  the 
fore  finger  of  his  right  hand  perpendicularly  across 


344  SIGNAL. SILENCE. 

his  lips,  which  was  a  caution  for  silence,  pointed  in 
the  direction  he  faced,  and  gave  the  sign  to  mount. 
We  mounted,  and  followed  on  a  narrow,  winding 
path,  leading  through  deep  ravines  and  broken  cliffs 
until  daylight,  not  one  word  passing  between  us 
during  this  long  ride.  At  the  appearance  of  day  he 
turned  off  the  trail,  and  went  into  the  hollow  of  a 
mountain  covered  with  thick  shrubbery.  Here  he 
dismounted,  and  giving  us  the  sign,  we  did  the  same. 
Placing  by  our  side  his  goatskin  bags  filled  with 
provisions  and  a  gourd  of  water,  he  told  us  that 
night  precisely  at  8  o'clock  he  would  come,  and  we 
must  answer  a  particular  whistle  which  he  then 
made.  So  saying,  he  and  his  comrades  led  away 
the  horses  and  mules.  After  eating,  we  laid  our- 
selves upon  the  ground,  and  slept  soundly  until  near 
night. 

At  eight  o'clock  P.M.  we  heard  the  concerted 
whistle,  and  answered  it,  when  our  robber  stealthily 
approached,  with  the  never-failing  caution  of  his 
fore  finger  across  his  lips.  He  made  the  sign  to  fol- 
low, which  we  did,  and  after  winding  us  through  a 
very  rough  tract  for  about  a  mile,  another  whistle 
and  its  response  discovered  to  us  his  companion, 
holding  our  animals. 

At  the  given  sign  we  mounted,  and  followed  this 
night,  as  we  had  done  the  last,  under  that  dead  si- 
lence, which  made  our  journey  the  more  oppressive. 
Our  rugged  and  winding  way  through  the  mount- 
ains, which  caused  us  frequently,  in  the  same  hour, 


SURE-FOOTED   ANIMALS. RIO    ANTIGUA.         345 

to  travel  to  every  point  of  the  compass,  showed  that 
our  conductor  knew  the  country  well.  Our  faithful 
animals,  so  well  used  to  that  mountainous  region, 
were  astonishingly  sure  footed.  Frequently,  in  pass- 
ing around  almost  perpendicular  cliffs,  in  paths  ex- 
ceedingly stony  and  frightfully  narrow,  with  a  dark 
abyss  on  the  one  hand  and  a  perpendicular  mount- 
ain on  the  other,  the  thought  of  our  animals  stum- 
bling would  make  our  hair  stand  on  end.  Those, 
however,  who  are  used  to  these  paths  seem  not  to 
apprehend  danger,  and  they  have  the  utmost  con- 
fidence in  their  animals,  which  pick  their  way  with 
a  loose  rein,  and  seem  to  know  the  necessity  of  a 
sure  foothold. 

Nearly  the  whole  of  this  night  we  rode  in  a  heavy 
rain,  and  for  two  hours  in  the  most  tremendous 
storm.  About  one  hour  before  daylight  we  ap- 
proached the  Rio  Antigua,  near  the  puente  nacional, 
and  across  the  great  road  leading  from  Vera  Cruz 
to  the  capital.  Keeping  the  river  to  our  right,  we 
travelled  through  a  flat,  marshy  bottom  until  day- 
light, when  we  were  told  to  "dismount  and  lay 
low."  We  had  been  drenched  the  whole  night 
with  a  cold  rain,  and  had  now  to  repose  in  water 
ankle  deep,  which  covered  the  bottom.  Excessive 
fatigue  soon  brought  sweet  sleep  to  us,  from  which 
we  were  aroused  at  noon  by  the  known  whistle  of 
our  guide. 

He  had  under  his  blanket  a  delightfully-cooked 
chicken,   eggs,   and   tortillas,  smoking   hot,  which 

Xx 


346  GRAY-BEARDED    OLD    MAN. 

showed  that  he  was  in  the  vicinity  of  his  accom- 
plices. We  never  enjoyed  a  meal  better.  After  we 
had  finished  eating,  he  threw  around  his  shoulders 
his  dark-coloured  serape,  and  with  his  usual  sign  of 
silence  disappeared  through  the  bushes. 

Everything  in  this  life  is  good  by  comparison. 
We  had  slept  several  hours,  and  a  sumptuous  meal 
made  us  feel  vastly  more  comfortable  ;  but  yet  we 
were  deprived  of  our  dessert,  for  Dan  could  neither 
sing  "  Long,  long  ago,"  or  the  "  Soldier's  Tear." 
After  whispering  to  one  another  our  anecdotes,  we 
slept  several  hours  more,  when  our  well-known 
whistle  again  started  us.  Our  guide  approached 
and  beckoned  us  to  follow  him.  After  half  an  hour 
winding  us  through  a  boggy  bottom,  we  came  to  an 
unoccupied  hut,  built  of  bamboos,  and  covered  with 
palm  leaves.  Here  he  told  us  we  might  sleep  this 
night,  as  he  must  rest  his  horses  ;  that  he  had  some 
friends  at  hand,  and  if  any  alarm  should  be  given, 
we  must  disappear  in  the  thick  bushes  near  by. 

In  a  short  time  he  again  returned  with  a  new 
friend,  a  long  gray-bearded,  though  athletic  old  man. 
The  old  man  greeted  us  very  kindly,  with  many 
professions  of  devotion  to  our  interest,  and  from  his 
signs  we  readily  recognised  him  to  be  a  brother  in 
the  same  cause  as  our  guide.  We  gave  him  two  dol- 
lars to  procure  us  supper,  and,  after  an  absence  of 
an  hour,  he  returned  with  one  smoking  hot,  which 
we  the  more  enjoyed,  as  our  clothes  were  now  meas- 
urably dry.     The  old  man  lived  in  the  immediate 


MEETING    ROBBERS.  347 

neighbourhood,  and,  true  to  his  promises,  he  and  his 
family  kept  a  close  watch  over  us  that  night  and 
the  next  day. 

At  sundown  our  horses  were  brought  up,  and  an 
additional  one  for  the  gray-headed  old  man,  who, 
with  all  his  travelling  paraphernalia,  showed  that  he 
meant  to  see  us  safe  through  our  journey.  This 
veteran,  with  all  the  pride  of  many  years,  mounted 
upon  a  gay,  plaited-tailed  charger,  rode  ahead  of  the 
party.  He  was  a  man  of  ready  words  and  many 
compliments ;  next  to  him  came  our  head  man,  of 
much  less  address,  who  knew  that  our  greatest 
difficulty  was  yet  to  encounter.  This  night  we 
met  frequent  companies  of  smugglers  and  robbers, 
but  the  gray-bearded  old  man  passed  them  with  as 
much  ease  of  address  as  one  could  speak  to  his 
neighbour  upon  a  court  green.  We  would  follow 
in  our  dark  robber  costume  without  saying  a  word, 
and  doubtless  passed  as  citizens  in  the  same  trade. 

Our  course  still  lay  down  the  River  Antigua, 
and  on  the  personal  estate  of  Santa  Anna,  through 
a  dense  forest  of  large  trees,  many  of  which  were 
new  to  our  northern  raising.  Among  the  most 
remarkable  was  the  celebrated  banian-tree,  of  the 
fig  family  (Ficus  religiosa),  which  has  been  so  long 
regarded  by  the  Hindoos  with  religious  venera- 
tion. This  tree  has  the  singular  quality  of  ex- 
tending long  horizontal  branches  from  the  trunk, 
about  twenty  or  thirty  feet  above  the  ground,  and 
throwing  out  roots  from  these  branches,  which  will 


348  THE    BANIAN-TREE.- — ENTER    ANTIGUA. 

continue  to  grow  downward  through  the  open  air 
until  they  reach  the  ground,  take  hold,  and  them- 
selves become  trunks.  We  observed  a  vast  number 
of  these  trunks,  covering  a  large  extent  of  ground, 
all  united  in  one  common  covering  of  dense  foliage, 
and  each  trunk  giving  the  like  support  to  the  others, 
as  well-set  and  well-braced  pillars  in  an  edifice 
would  to  its  aggregate  of  strength.  An  immortal 
bard  makes  this  the  kind  of  fig-tree  from  which  our 
first  parents  procured  their  first  aprons : 

"  There  soon  they  chose 
The  fig-tree  -t  not  that  kind  for  fruit  renown'd. 
But  such  as  at  this  day,  to  Indians  known, 
In  Malabra  or  Deccan,  spreads  her  arms, 
Branching  so  broad  and  long,  that  in  the  ground 
The  bended  twigs  take  root,  and  daughters  grow 
About  the  mother  tree  a  pillow'd  shade. 
***#--*         *** 

*****        Those  leaves 
They  gathered."* 

The  undergrowth  consisted  of  limes  and  other 
tropical  fruits.  It  was  necessary  that  the  Antigua 
should  be  crossed  before  reaching  Vera  Cruz,  and 
the  only  practical  point  of  so  doing  was  at  the  small 
town  of  the  same  name  near  its  mouth.  This  place, 
which  we  entered  about  ten  o'clock  at  night,  has 
been  for  many  years  a  noted  place  for  smuggling. 
Vessels  anchor  off  the  mouth  of  this  river  under  pre- 
tence of  getting  fresh  water,  which  affords  them  a 
good  opportunity  to  carry  on  the  contraband  trade. 
The  wide  and  dense  bottom  which  lay  upon  each 

*  See  Book  IX.  of  Milton's  "  Paradise  Lost." 


CAVALRY    OFFICER    AND    OLD    GRAY-BEARD.     349 

side  of  this  river,  interspersed  with  circuitous  paths, 
known  only  to  smugglers  and  robbers,  affords  ample 
shelter  for  this  illicit  trade.  Here  our  old  man  was 
well  acquainted;  and  when  we  entered  the  town, 
he  drew  up  his  horse  opposite  a  store,  with  a  light 
burning  on  the  counter,  where  a  Mexican  caval- 
ry officer  was  writing  at  the  desk.  He  whispered 
to  us  not  to  dismount ;  that  he  would  go  in  and 
buy  some  cheese  and  crackers  for  our  supper,  and 
see  "  how  the  land  lay." 

Upon  entering  the  house,  he  appeared  to  be  well 
acquainted,  and  rolled  out  his  salutations  with  his 
usual  volubility.  The  cavalry  officer  first  addressed 
him,  "Who  are  those  upon  their  horses  in  the 
street?  I  have  been  sent  here  with  my  troop 
these  two  weeks,  with  orders  to  send  every  foreign- 
er without  passports  to  the  Castle  of  San  Juan  de 
Ulloa.  Do  you  know  that  sixteen  of  those  daring 
Texians  have  escaped  from  the  Castle  of  Perote, 
and  several  of  them  are  yet  abroad?"  Before  the 
old  man  had  time  to  reply,  the  officer  added,  "  As 
soon  as  I  finish  this  note,  I  will  examine  their  pa- 
pers." 

The  old  man,  with  his  ready  wit,  replied  that 
"they  have  all  got  passports,  and  from  the  Eng- 
lish minister  at  that,  and  they  are  going  home," 
at  the  same  time  setting  a  large  tumbler  of  aguar- 
diente before  the  officer  with  many  compliments. 
He  drank  to  the  venerable  old  man,  and  resumed 
his  writing  in  much  hurry,  so  as  to  examine  our 
passports. 


350    NARROW  ESCAPE  FROM  THE  CAVALRY. 

The  old  man  continued  talking  with  his  usual 
vivacity,  and  threw  another  dollar  upon  the  counter 
for  more  brandy,  and  before  the  note  was  finished 
the  officer  had  to  stop  and  take  another  drink. 
Watching  his  opportunity,  the  old  man  slipped  out 
into  the  street  and  spoke  to  the  head  robber  to 
"pat  off  in  haste,  and  cross  the  ferry  as  soon  as 
possible,"  while  he  would  stay  and  drink  with  the 
officer.  The  ferry  was  at  the  other  end  of  the 
town,  about  four  hundred  yards  distant,  and  we 
made  as  little  delay  in  reaching  it  and  getting  into 
the  boat  as  possible.  We  had  barely  started  from 
the  store  before  the  officer  came  into  the  street  to 
examine  our  papers,  when  the  old  man  remarked 
that  he  expected  we  would  wait  for  him  at  the 
ferry.  The  old  man  now  feigned  to  be  highly  ex- 
cited with  drink,  and  mounting  upon  his  fiery  horse, 
swept  by  them  as  though  he  could  not  control  the 
animal.  He  reached  the  ferry  just  as  we  were  get- 
ting into  the  boat,  and  the  shortest  explanation 
showTed  the  necessity  of  our  hurry. 

The  old  man  had  no  sooner  spoke  to  our  head 
robber  than  he  threw  his  lasso  over  a  limb  of  a  tree 
which  stood  upon  the  bank,  and  ran  back  to  meet 
the  officer.  He  knew  that  one  minute  of  time  was 
of  the  last  importance  to  us;  and  meeting  the  officer 
about  one  hundred  yards  from  the  ferry,  he  said, 
"  They  are  waiting  for  us,"  and  drawing  his  bottle 
of  aguardiente  from  his  goatskin  bag,  he  passed  it  to 
the  officer;  then  he  took  a  drink  with  a  long  speech 


DECEIVING   THE   OFFICER.  351 

of  salutations,  and  begged  the  officer  to  let  him  pass 
it  to  his  guards.  This  was  granted ;  and  it  gain- 
ed us  those  few  minutes  of  time  necessary  to  our 
liberty.  When  they  arrived  at  the  ferry  we  were 
half  way  across ;  the  old  man  appeared  in  a  tower- 
ing passion,  and  bawled  out  to  us  "  to  stop  upon  the 
other  bank  until  he  came  over;"  he  then  turned  to  the 
officer  and  said,  "  Senor,  you  need  not  trouble  your- 
self farther  about  those  foreigners:  III  vouch  for  their 
passports  ;  but  if  you  would  rather,  go  over  with  me 
and  examine  for  yourself."  In  the  mean  time,  while 
the  boat  was  returning,  the  bottle  was  freely  passed 
between  them,  the  old  man  feigning  both  to  drink 
and  to  be  drunk.  It  was  no  sham  with  the  officer, 
for  by  the  time  the  boat  returned  for  them,  he  was 
willing  to  take  the  old  man's  word  for  the  passports. 

As  soon  as  we  had  crossed,  we  put  off  in  the  di- 
rection of  Vera  Cruz,  and  stopped  upon  the  road- 
side to  wait  for  our  good  old  friend,  and  to  keep  a 
bright  look  out  who  was  with  him. 

In  a  few  minutes  the  boat  recrossed,  and  we  dis- 
covered that  only  one  passenger  was  in  it ;  and  as 
the  old  man  galloped  up  to  where  we  awaited  him, 
he  proudly  clapped  his  hands  upon  his  breast  and 
said,  "  It  is  useless  for  young  boys  to  try  their  wits 
with  me  ;  I  have  been  too  long  in  the  service." 

The  old  fellow  strutted  to  and  fro,  and  recounted 
the  adventure  with  the  self-satisfaction  of  a  Wel- 
lington after  the  battle  of  Waterloo.  He  concluded 
his  speech  by  turning  to  us  and  saying,  "  Now,  ca- 


352  SECRETED    FOR    THE    NIGHT. 

hatlerds,  you  have  but  one  more  danger  before  you, 
and  trust  this  old  head  for  that."  So  saying,  we 
moved  on. 

We  were  now  fifteen  miles  from  Vera  Cruz,  and 
just  ahead  of  us  the  road  forked,  both  leading  to  it, 
the  one  via  the  seacoast,  and  the  other  via  Manga 
de  Clavo,  the  seat  of  Santa  Anna.  By  mistake,  the 
old  man  took  the  right-hand  road,  which  led  by 
Santa  Anna's  house.  He  had  gone  but  a  few  hun- 
dred yards  before  he  stopped,  and,  after  a  thought- 
ful look,  turned  to  us  with  that  slow  wave  of  the 
fore  finger  peculiar  to  that  nation,  and  said  that  "  it 
was  not  good  for  us  to  travel  that  road,"  and  after 
shaking  his  jolly  sides  with  a  good  hearty  laugh,  he 
wheeled  to  the  left,  and  soon  fell  into  the  one  lead- 
ing by  the  seashore.  This  road  we  travelled  about 
five  miles,  until  we  reached  the  mouth  of  the  river, 
where  we  crept  into  the  bushes  and  slept  till  day- 
light. The  head  robber,  when  we  stopped  for  the 
night,  informed  us  that  he  would  go  to  Vera  Cruz 
and  arrange  for  our  entry,  and  that  we  must  remain 
under  charge  of  the  old  man  and  his  companion  till 
his  return. 

At  daylight  we  changed  our  lodging  by  crawling 
into  a  cluster  of  bushes  upon  the  top  of  a  conical 
sandhill,  which  commanded  a  view  of  the  river, 
sea,  and  road.  Here  we  lay  all  day,  saw  several 
vessels  pass  in  and  out  from  Vera  Cruz,  one  of 
which,  we  afterward  found,  contained  our  friend 
Toowig,  who  had  reached  that  place  just  as  she 


A    NEW    FRIEND.  353 

was  in  the  act  of  sailing.  Many  persons  passed  the 
road  at  a  short  distance  from  us,  but  the  moveable 
sands  had  obliterated  our  tracks,  and  we  felt  secure. 

About  noon  our  junior  robber  brought  us  some- 
thing to  eat,  and  a  gourd  of  water.  In  the  evening 
a  sand  storm  came  over  us,  which  wellnigh  buried 
all  hands. 

Our  anxiety  for  the  return  of  our  guide  now  grew 
intense,  as  it  was  near  night,  and  no  news  of  him. 
About  one  hour  before  sunset  we  discovered  two 
men  riding  at  full  gallop  down  the  road  from  Vera 
Cruz.  Watching  them  closely,  we  recognised  both 
the  horse  and  clothes  of  our  guide.  Not  knowing 
our  exact  locality,  as  we  had  changed  it  after  he 
had  started  for  the  city,  he  and  his  new  companion 
rode  upon  a  bald  sandhill,  and  made  a  sign  with  a 
handkerchief.  We  answered  it  by  tying  one  upon 
a  stick,  and  running  it  up  above  the  cluster  of  bush- 
es where  we  lay,  upon  seeing  which  they  came  to 
us.  A  few  words  of  explanation  told  them  where 
the  old  man  and  his  partner  kept  the  horses.  They 
soon  brought  them  up,  and  we  started  for  the  city. 

This  new  friend  of  ours,  whom  justice  to  himself 
forbids  me  to  introduce  to  the  reader  in  his  proper 
person,  had  been  for  weeks  looking  for  us  to  make 
our  appearance  about  Vera  Cruz.  It  must  suffice 
when  I  say  that  this  friend,  Don  E.,  was  a  warm- 
hearted, whole-souled  man,  and  I  regret  to  say  that 
there  are  few  such  Mexicans  in  that  whole  nation. 
He  had  provided  us  safe  quarters,  and  from  him  our 

Yy 


354         STORM    AND    SEPARATION.— SUSPICIONS. 

robber  guides  were  to  receive  a  certificate  of  our 
safe  delivery  before  they  would  be  paid  the  balance 
due  their  contract  upon  their  return. 

Upon  leaving  our  hiding-place  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Rio  Antigua,  in  company  with  our  three  robber 
guides  and  Don  E.,  we  rode  at  a  rapid  gait,  as  it 
was  important  to  reach  the  city  before  nine  o'clock, 
at  which  hour  the  city  gates  would  be  closed. 
When  within  three  or  four  miles  of  the  city,  a  vio- 
lent blow  coming  on,  Don  E.  and  the  gray-headed 
old  man  being  a  short  distance  ahead,  got  separated 
from  us,  and  search  after  them  was  wholly  vain. 

The  other  two  robbers  kept  on  with  us  till  within 
a  mile  of  the  city  walls  ;  here  our  dark-complexioned 
head  man  stopped  and  said  that  "he  would  go  no 
farther ;  that  there  was  some  rascality  afloat  with 
our  Vera  Cruz  friend ;  that  he  did  not  like  his  coun- 
tenance ;  that  he  would  doubtless,  if  he  could,  betray 
all  hands ;  and,"  says  he,  "  where  would  my  neck  be 
if  he  did I"  We  remonstrated  with  him  to  no  pur- 
pose ;  we  begged  him  to  take  us  to  the  city  gates, 
where  our  friend  would  certainly  come,  as  the  force 
of  the  storm  had  separated  him  from  us  without  his 
desire.  But  no ;  he  said  we  must  dismount  here, 
and  creep  into  some  bushes  near  by,  and  next  morn- 
ing he  would  make  his  way  into  the  city  and  find 
out  all  about  it.  We  had  no  alternative  but.  to  com- 
ply, and  a  more  disagreeable  night  we  have  rarely 
spent.  A  cold  rain  fell  in  torrents  upon  us  the  whole 
night. 


ENTRY    INTO    THE    CITY.  355 

True  to  his  promise,  our  head  man  went  into  the 
city  next  morning  in  disguise,  and  after  ascertaining 
through  some  friends  that  Don  E.'s  intentions  were 
honourable,  and  that  he  was  greatly  distressed  at 
being  separated  from  us,  he  sought  and  informed 
Don  E.  where  we  had  been  left. 

Don  E.  and  the  old  man  having  kept  up  the  whole 
night  watching,  and  next  morning  having  procured 
a  fresh  horse,  they  rode  around  the  town  in  every 
direction,  in  hopes  of  finding  us,  when  they  met  the 
robber,  and  learned  where  he  had  left  us  over  night. 

Our  Mexican  friend,  Don  E.,  cauie  to  the  spot 
where  we  had  dismounted  the  night  before.  We 
had  moved  our  lodgings  some  two  hundred  yards, 
though  we  recognised  him,  and  hoisted  a  flag  from 
the  bushes  where  we  lay  concealed.  He  knew  it, 
and  came  to  us.  This  was  about  noon.  He  told 
us  to  leave  our  blankets,  and  follow  him  at  about  two 
hundred  yards  distant,  and  let  that  distance  inter- 
vene between  each  of  us,  and  to  look  as  if  we  be- 
longed to  the  city.  This  we  did  :  he  went  ahead  ; 
Reese,  Dan,  and  myself  followed  through  the  crowd, 
each  whistling,  with  as  "  don't  care  a  look"  as  can 
be  well  imagined.  We  passed  through  the  city  this 
way,  making  it  convenient  to  stop  into  a  French- 
man's drinking-house  to  warm  the  "  inward  man:' 

We  regretted  to  hear  that  no  vessel  would  sail  for 
the  United  States,  and  our  friend  Don  E.  conducted 
us  to  a  small  private  room  upon  the  second  floor, 
where  we  were  fed  from  a  restaurante. 


356    PARTING  WITH  OUR  ROBBER  GUIDES. 

After  we  had  been  safely  ensconced  in  our  hiding- 
place,  our  three  faithful  guides  came  to  take  leave 
of  us.  They  did  so  in  the  most  feeling  manner. 
The  gray-bearded  old  man  made  the  valedictory. 
He  congratulated  us  upon  our  extreme  good  luck 
in  falling  into  the  hands  of  "  honourable  men,"  for, 
says  he,  "  as  humble  as  your  apparel  appears  to  be, 
you  must  know  that  there  are  thousands  in  this 
country  who  would  murder  you  for  that  dirty  jack- 
et," pointing  to  the  one  I  had  on.  "I  thank  God," 
said  he,  "that  as  long  as  I  have  worn  this  gray 
beard  I  have  never  forfeited  my  w7ord  of  honour." 

During  this  speech  he  strutted  across  the  room 
with  the  utmost  self-satisfaction,  slapping  his  hands 
upon  his  bosom  whenever  he  spoke  of  a  man  of  hon- 
our. When  he  had  finished  his  speech,  we  drew 
from  the  waistband  of  our  pantaloons  several  ounces 
of  gold,  which  we  had  been  careful  to  keep  dark 
until  now,  and  distributed  among  them  as  a  gratuity 
over  and  above  their  contract.  We  thought  this 
precaution  would  seal  their  allegiance,  as  we  had 
been  often  told  that  the  most  honest  collectors  of 
customs  in  Mexico  will  say  to  the  importer,  "  That,  as 
thin  as  is  a  doubloon,  no  man  can  see  through  it." 

We  had  taken  particular  pains  upon  the  road  to 
exhibit  our  small  store  of  silver,  which  they  suppo- 
sed was  all  we  had.  When  they  saw  the  gold 
come  forth  from  its  hiding-place,  a  look  of  surprise 
w7as  exchanged  ;  and  when  they  fingered  the  yellow 
stuff,  their  countenances  beamed  with  renewed  de- 
votion to  our  interest. 


OUR    HIDING-PLACE.  357 

We  certified  in  writing  that  they  had  been  true 
and  faithful  to  us,  and  the  tall,  dark-skinned  robber, 
after  first  kissing  the  paper,  carefully  stored  it  in  a 
secret  place  under  his  shirt.  Upon  taking  leave,  the 
old  man,  after  several  facetious  jokes  "  how  we 
would  surprise  our  sweethearts  when  we  reached 
home,"  embraced  us  with  a  Mexican  hug  both  long 
and  strong.  In  Mexico,  one's  regard  for  another  is 
graduated  in  proportion  to  the  length  and  strength 
of  the  embrace.  Thus  each  of  these  robbers  em- 
braced us,  and  thus  we  returned  it ;  for  if  we  found 
in  all  Mexico  the  most  fearless  devotion  to  our  in- 
terest while  in  misfortune,  it  was  in  our  three  rob- 
ber guides. 

Cooped  up  in  this  situation  we  remained  thirteen 
days,  and  it  was  anything  else  than  pleasant.  Our 
lodging  was  in  the  midst  of  the  infected  district, 
where  scores  died  daily  of  the  vomito,  the  worst 
kind  of  yellow  fever,  and  where  we  we  were  con- 
stantly under  apprehension  of  discovery.  A  small 
window  opening  from  our  hiding-place  into  the 
street  gave  us  a  full  view  of  every  passer-by,  among 
whom  were  several  officers  of  the  Mexican  army 
that  we  well  knew,  and  among  them  Captain  Santa 
Anna,  son  of  the  President,  whom  we  had  seen  pass- 
ing Perote.  Here  in  this  death's  hole  we  had  to 
lay  and  sweat  out  the  last  days  of  hot  July.  We 
would  long  for  the  approach  of  night,  that  we  might 
walk  forth,  as  recreation  both  of  mind  and  body ; 
for  during  the  eternal  tolling  of  the  church  bells  over 


358  UNITED    STATES    FRIENDS. 

the  dead  and  dying,  we  could  fancy  the  dreadful 
malaria  coursing  through  our  veins. 

After  night  it  was  my  habit  to  go  to  a  hot  bath  a 
few  squares  distant,  where  an  hour's  bathing  was 
succeeded  by  a  profuse  perspiration,  which  was  of 
great  relief  to  me.  On  one  occasion,  after  coming 
out  of  the  bath,  I  stepped  into  a  drinking  establish- 
ment for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  the  perspiration, 
and  while  taking  a  drink  at  the  counter,  two  Mexi- 
can officers  came  in  and  drank  by  my  side.  One 
of  these  officers  I  knew;  and  as  my  disguise  prevent- 
ed his  recognition  of  me,  I  concluded  compliments 
were  unnecessary.  I  am  sure  the  free  use  of  the 
bath  kept  me  from  taking  the  disease ;  for  my  com- 
panions, contrary  to  my  advice,  not  making  such 
constant  use  of  it,  were  both  taken  down,  upon 
reaching  home,  with  the  severest  cases  of  fever. 

During  our  seclusion  here,  several  seafaring  men 
from  the  United  States,  then  in  port,  found  out 
where  we  were  hid,  and  came  to  see  us  and  offer 
their  services.  Among  them  was  my  old  friend  Cap- 
tain F -,  and  Captain  H ,  and  Captain . 

These  gentlemen  were  of  the  most  essential  service 
to  us,  and  I  regret  that  it  might  be  doing  them  a 
disservice  by  returning  thanks  to  them  by  name. 

The  good  Donna  E.,  to  while  away  our  time,  fre- 
quently sang  for  us,  and  her  charming  voice,  like 
balm  upon  a  wound,  soothed  our  spirits,  and  made 
our  confinement  more  tolerable.  This  good  lady 
never  seemed  tired  of  serving  us,  and  long  shall  we 


ROOM-MATES. DICK    BARCLAY.  359 

cherish  the  kindest  remembrance  both  of  her  and 
the  Don's  goodness. 

In  her  absence  we  had  two  room-mates  in  two 
loquacious  parrots.  The  younger  of  the  two  had 
much  to  say.  He  rolled  the  drum  and  blew  the  bu- 
gle after  the  manner  of  the  guards.  He  imitated  the 
bray  of  the  burros,  sang  the  chorus  to  several  of  the 
Donna's  songs,  and  at  times  was  exceedingly  wick- 
ed, and  would  swear  outrageously. 

The  other  was  an  old  housekeeper,  and  entirely 
blind.  She  would  sit  upon  the  door  for  hours  to- 
gether, occasionally  muttering  to  herself  like  some 
superannuated  grandmother,  who  fancied  that  she 
was  neglected  by  the  rising  generation.  No  sooner, 
however,  were  our  meals  brought  in,  than  her  worn- 
out  nature  seemed  to  reanimate;  and,  unless  she  was 
quickly  served,  would  bawl  out  in  the  most  emphat- 
ic and  indignant  tone,  "  Here  am  I,  old  and  cross- 
eyed, and  you  don't  care  a for  me."  This  re- 
buke never  failed  to  procure  her  a  breakfast.  In- 
deed, in  the  absence  of  more  dishonest  bipeds,  we 
found  much  company  in  these  birds. 

After  we  had  been  several  days  in  our  dark  room, 
looking  into  the  street  one  day,  who  should  pass  but 
Dick  Barclay.  Dick  was  the  first  of  our  escaped 
companions  we  had  seen :  we  called  him  in,  and 
learned  the  following  account  of  the  balance : 

It  was  now  one  month  since  we  left  the  prison 
walls  of  Perote.  During  this  time,  Dick,  with  his 
chum  Cornegay,  had  kept  in  the  mountains,  occa- 


360  RECAPTURE    OF    OUR    COMRADES. 

sionally  venturing  into  the  huts  of  poor  people  to 
purchase  supplies,  and  had  most  ingeniously  worked 
his  way  into  this  place  under  assumed  characters : 
that  the  night  after  our  separation  at  the  castle,  the 
Herculean  John  Young  had  fallen  over  a  preci- 
pice in  the  mountains,  and  badly  crippled  himself — 
so  much  so  that  he  was  taken  back  to  prison  in  a 
most  helpless  condition :  that  Beck  and  Davis,  his 
comrades,  were  also  retaken  by  the  pursuing  caval- 
ry :  that  Tom  Hancock  had  also  been  retaken  in 
venturing  into  a  rancho  to  buy  supplies :  that  Cap- 
tain Ogden  was  retaken  entering  into  Jalapa  the 
night  we  left  it:  that  Ike  Allen,  Stone,  and  Elley 
were  still  afloat,  and  he  expected,  by  this  time,  "herd- 
ing their  cattle  upon  the  Rio  Bravo ;"  and  that  Dal- 
rymple  was  flourishing  in  the  city  of  the  Montezu- 
mas.  Toowig  had  already  sailed,  and  here  we  six 
were  in  anxious  expectation  of  so  doing. 

Let  us  for  a  moment  look  into  our  late  prison 
abode  at  the  castle. 

The  night  of  our  escape,  and  the  next  morning 
up  to  the  counting  time,  as  might  be  expected,  our 
late  companions  were  under  the  most  excited  ap- 
prehension, not  only  on  our  account,  but  also  what 
the  discovery  might  cost  them.  Under  this  excite- 
ment, things  remained  quiet  as  usual,  for  no  one  in 
the  castle  except  themselves  knew  a  breath  of  it. 
At  ^nine  o'clock  next  morning,  Guts  and  the  new 
guard  came  around  to  the  prison  rooms  with  the 
sharp  and  often-repeated  order  " a fomien, afonnen" 


A  LOOK    INTO    THE    CASTLE.  361 

This  order  was  well  understood  by  our  countrymen ; 
it  meant  "  to  form,"  and  that  in  front  of  the  prison 
doors,  as  usual,  in  the  morning ;  but  still  they  held 
back,  and  were  slow  to  come  out  of  the  cells. 
Some  made  one  excuse,  some  another ;  Guts  storm- 
ed at  their  tardiness ;  he  went  into  the  cells  in 
person  to  look  where  the  absent  were,  and  found 
them  not ;  he  inquired  of  the  balance ;  one  says, 
"  Perhaps  they  are  at  the  comun ;"  another  says, 
"  They  are  at  the  tienda  :"  these  places  w7ere  sent  to, 
but  they  were  not  to  be  found.  Our  boys  said 
among  themselves,  "  We  will  put  them  off  to  the 
last  minute,  for  every  minute  is  important  to  them, 
as  they  can  get  the  deeper  into  the  mountains." 
During  this  time  Guts  swelled  and  raved :  "  Where 
are  they  1"  he  thundered  out  to  the  interpreter ;  when 
some  of  them  said,  "  Well,  Van,"  to  Van  Ness,  "  it 
is  no  use  to  put  it  off  any  longer ;  let  him  have  it." 
Van  replied,  "Deiz  y  sets  faltan' — sixteen  deficient. 
"  Where  are  they  gone  to,  and  how  did  they  get  out !" 
bawled  Guts,  in  a  still  louder  tone.  "  Quien  sabe  V — 
who  knows  ?  was  the  reply.  Then  commenced  the 
greatest  possible  row  :  the  whole  castle  was  alarm- 
ed—  officers  and  soldiers  turned  out — the  governor 
came  forth  with  death-like  horror  upon  his  counte- 
nance— officers  and  guards  flew  all  over  the  castle ; 
examined  every  nook  and  corner — the  top  walls — 
went  round  the  great  moat,  but  still  did  not  discov- 
er the  breach,  the  hole  having  been  so  carefully  stop- 
ped with  the  blanket.     The  last  place  where  they 

Zz 


362       SURPRISE,   WONDER,  AND   ASTONISHMENT. 

thought  of  looking  was  in  the  prison  cells,  and  after 
much  useless  search,  one  of  the  officers  pulled  back 
the  small  shutter  in  the  centre  room  which  covered 
the  loophole,  and  found,  to  his  inexpressible  horror, 
our  breach  obliquing  to  the  left.  "Who  could  have 
thought  these  daring  Texians  would  have  un- 
dertaken such  a  task  ?  they  surely  are  kin  to  the 
devil :  this  castle  has  stood  these  hundred  years,  and 
no  one  ever  dared  such  a  thing  before ;"  these,  and 
many  such  exclamations  of  wonder  and  astonish- 
ment, burst  forth  from  men,  women,  and  children, 
officers,  soldiers,  and  culprits ;  for  they  all,  from 
the  governor  to  the  smallest  child,  came  to  satisfy 
themselves  of  what  their  astonishment  mixed  up 
with  miracle. 

While  the  best-informed  Mexicans  will  admit  our 
superiority  in  war,  both  in  daring  and  the  use  of 
arms,  the  more  uninformed  entertain  the  strangest 
notions  of  us.  Many  believe  that  we  have  magic 
power,  and  have  near  kinship  with  the  devil.  Oth- 
ers believe  us  to  be  northern  barbarians,  of  one  of 
two  tribes  of  white  Indians,  who  form  the  connect- 
ing link  between  mankind  and  the  other  world. 

The  northern  Mexicans  have  frequently  thus  in- 
quired of  different  Texians,  "  Do  you  belong  to  the 
tribe  of  How-do-do's,  or  the  God-damn-me's  V  this 
being  the  first  English  which  they  are  apt  to  learn 
of  our  people.  They  are  generally  answered  that 
"  my  mamma  was  a  How-do-do,  and  my  daddy  was 
a  God-damn-me."     Thus  pedigreed,  the  Texian  is 


TREATMENT    OF    THE    RECAPTURED.  363 

looked  upon  by  them  with  far  more  astonishment 
than  the  Kentuckian  who  was  sired  by  a  steamboat 
and  come  out  of  a  penitentiary. 

My  letter  to  Santa  Anna  was  handed  to  the  gov- 
ernor, with  a  request  from  me  that  it  should  be  for- 
warded immediately  to  his  excellency  ;  and  as  it 
exonerated  the  governor  and  officers  from  any  neg- 
lect of  duty,  he  was  not  slow  to  comply  in  send- 
ing it  by  an  extraordinary  courier. 

The  surprise  which  our  escape  had  created  caus- 
ed another  hour  to  pass  before  the  cavalry  were 
mounted  and  sent  in  pursuit.  They  traced  us  to 
where  we  had  the  night  before  separated,  but  could 
follow  no  farther.  Then  they  separated  in  different 
commands,  and  took  different  roads  and  mountain- 
passes. 

We  have  already  given  an  account  of  those  re- 
captured, and  as  they  were  brought  back  to  the  cas- 
tle, they  were  locked  in  the  dark  calaboose,  except 
poor  John  Young,  who  had  fallen  over  a  precipice 
and  was  badly  crippled :  he  was  sent  to  the  hospital 
in  the  village,  where,  after  the  most  excruciating 
sufferings,  his  iron  constitution  survived  his  injuries. 

The  balance  of  our  countrymen  were  reironed, 
and  all  huddled  together  in  one  room  under  double 
guard  and  increased  vigilance.  The  officers  now 
thought  that  nothing  was  impossible  with  Texians  ; 
and  one  of  my  friends,  writing  from  the  castle,  said 
that  "  they  even  believe  that  we  will  escape  in  a  let- 
ter." 


364  ARREST   OF    LIMPY,   GUTS,    ETC. 

After  our  escape,  some  of  our  friends  circulated 
the  report  that  we  had  gone,  under  the  conduct  of 
five  Mexican  robbers,  to  join  Commodore  Moore, 
in  Yucatan.  The  consequence  of  this  report  was 
highly  beneficial,  as  the  greatest  search  was  made 
after  us  in  that  direction. 

Santa  Anna,  as  I  learned,  pretended  not  to  be- 
lieve my  statement,  and  very  unjustly  arrested  all 
the  officers  of  the  castle,  the  governor,  Limpy,  and 
Guts  inclusive. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

EMBARCATION  AT  VERA  CRUZ  FOR  HOME. 

Preparation  for  Embarcation. — Captain  Loyd  and  Steamer  Petrita. — Pass 
Officers  on  the  Mole. — Sup  on  board  a  U.  S.  Vessel. — Hailed  by  War 
Steamers. — Board  the  Petrita. — Meet  my  Companions  and  Dr.  Sinnick- 
son. — Mexican  Officers  come  on  board. — My  Berth  under  the  Boilers  : 
its  Temperature. — Dialogue  with  Steward. — Passage  and  Arrival  in 
New-Orleans. — Once  more  in  the  Land  of  Liberty. — "  Tom  and  Jer- 
ry," "  Hail  Storm,"  and  "  Sherry  Cobbler." — St.  Charles  Hotel  and  a 
Soft  Bed. — Sail  for  the  "  Lone  Star." — Land  at  Velasco. — Reese  and 
Dan. — Our  Remaining  Countrymen  in  Mexico.  —  Their  Destitution, 
Sufferings,  and  Deaths. — The  Cause,  and  Treasonable  Armistice  with 
Mexico. 

Upon  inquiry,  our  seafaring  friends  ascertained 
that  the  steamer  "Petrita,"  formerly  the  "Champion" 
of  Mobile,  would  be  the  first  vessel  sailing  for  the 
United  States;  that  her  captain  had  recently  died, 
and  she  was  now  in  charge  of  the  mate  Loyd.  Loyd 


PASS   OFFICERS    ON  THE    MOLE.  365 

was  an  old  acquaintance  of  mine,  and  a  true-hearted 
American  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that,  both  from 
personal  feeling  to  me  and  duty  to  his  nativity,  he 
readily  came  into  the  plan  of  assisting  myself  and 
companions  home.  So,  on  the  night  previous  to  the 
morning  upon  which  he  sailed,  my  friend  Captain 
H ,  of  New- York,  called  for  me  at  my  hiding- 
place.  Between  sundown  and  dark  we  started  for 
the  mole,  where  the  captain's  boat  lay.  I  saunter- 
ed along  in  his  rear  a  few  paces  without  baggage, 
and  while  the  officer  of  the  customs  was  examining 
a  portly  Englishman,  upon  whom  they  found  a 
wallet  of  silver  more  than  he  had  given  in,  and 
which  seemed  to  create  a  dispute  between  them, 
we  walked  past  with  as  much  apparent  indifference 
as  though  the  Mole  and  all  the  tax-gatherers  belong- 
ed to  us.  Upon  reaching  the  place  where  the  cap- 
tain's boat  lay,  we  kimboed  our  arms  and  talked 
loud,  pretending  to  be  in  no  great  hurry.  In  a  few 
minutes  it  grew  more  dark,  and  we  got  into  the 
boat  and  pulled  to  his  vessel  in  the  offing,  lying  near 
the  Mexican  steamers  Montezuma,  Gauddlowpe,  and 
Dublin  City,  which  had  that  day  arrived  from 
Yucatan  with  General  Ampudia's  retreating  army. 
Here  we  partook  of  a  warm  supper,  a  good  glass  of 
wine,  and  discussed  our  "  father-land." 

Just  before  nine  o'clock  the  captain  and  myself 
slipped  down  the  side  of  his  vessel  into  the  boat 
waiting  to  receive  us.  He  steered  past  the  war 
steamers,  and  was  hailed  by  the  sentinel,  to  which 


366     MEET  COMPANIONS.— A  HOT  BERTH. 

he  made  no  reply,  and  coming  alongside  of  the  Pe- 
trita,  about  one  hundred  yards  still  farther  on,  my 
good  old  friend  Loyd  was  ready  to  receive  us  with 
open  heart. 

On  board  I  found  Forester  and  Cornegay,  who 
had  shipped  as  firemen,  and  who  were  standing  be- 
low, with  smutty  faces  and  red  flannel  shirts,  as 
though  they  had  been  brought  up  to  that  business. 
Also  Captain  Reese,  Dan,  and  Dick  Barclay,  with 
English  names  and  English  protections  in  their 
pockets,  and  who  looked  as  independent  as  wood- 
sawyers.  Also  Dr.  Sinnickson,  who  had  been  re- 
leased by  President  Santa  Anna  at  the  instance  of 
General  Thompson.  Captain  Loyd  told  me  that 
there  would  be  no  danger  that  night,  and  in  the 
morning  he  would  stow  me  safely  below  when  the 
boarding-officer  came  alongside. 

We  had  a  good  sleep  this  night,  and  early  next 
morning  the  captain  told  me  that  he  would  go  ashore 
with  his  boat,  and  when  the  officer  started  to  come 
on  board  he  would  make  a  signal,  and  then  I  was 
to  go  below  and  crawl  under  the  boilers.  The 
boat's  hour  for  sailing  was  8  o'clock  A.M.,  and  her 
steam  had  been  up  half  an  hour  when  Loyd  made 
the  concerted  signal  from  the  Mole.  I  went  below, 
and  crawled  into  the  darkest  and  hottest  place  this 
side  of  the  infernal  regions.  Every  five  seconds  I 
had  to  turn  over  to  keep  from  burning  to  death 
I  was  willing  to  take  a  good  scorching,  as  I  had  set- 
tled it  in  my  mind  never  to  be  taken  back  to  prison 


DIALOGUE    WITH    STEWARD.  367 

alive.  The  hour  which  the  officer  occupied  in  ex- 
amining the  passports  and  vessel  appeared  to  me  to 
be  a  year,  and  being  nearly  exhausted,  I  determined 
to  come  out  and  meet  the  consequences.  As  I 
reached  the  front  of  the  fireman's  hole,  the  officers 
were  getting  into  their  boats,  and  Loyd  called  to  me. 

Being  helped  out  of  the  hole  by  the  firemen,  with 
much  difficulty  I  reached  the  cabin,  and  called  to  the 
negro  steward,  "  For  God's  sake,  to  give  me  a  bowl 
of  water." 

My  inferior  wardrobe  and  dirty  appearance,  cov- 
ered with  sweat  and  coal-dust,  speaking  thus  to  the 
head  steward,  stirred  up  his  aristocracy.  He  slowly 
turned  his  head  over  his  shoulder,  and  eyeing  me 
with  the  most  significant  contempt,  said,  "Look  here, 
stranger,  you  cabin  passenger  1"  "  Yes,"  was  the 
reply  ;  when,  giving  another  look  at  me,  he  said,  "  I 
doubt  it  d — nably." 

I  replied,  "My  good  fellow,  you  have  a  perfect 
right  to  doubt  it ;  but  ask  that  man,"  pointing  to  the 
captain.  He  went  to  the  captain,  and  pointing  to 
me  with  increased  contempt,  said,  "  Captain,  is  that 
fellow  a  cabin  passenger  1"  The  captain  chucked 
him  in  the  side,  and  whispered,  "  Yes ;  that  is  Gen- 
eral Green,  of  Texas  ;  and  get  him  what  he  wants." 

The  poor  steward  came  to  me  with  the  most  con- 
trite physiognomy  imaginable,  and  after  poking  his 
face  close  to  mine,  and  peeping  through  sweat,  dust, 
and  beard,  he  discovered  behind  these  uncomforta- 
ble companions   an  old  friend  and  acquaintance. 


368  ARRIVAL    AT    NEW-ORLEANS. 

"  Good  God !"  says  he,  "  master,  I  know  you  now ;" 
and  from  that  time  this  deeply-mortified  black  man 
smothered  me  with  kindness.  He  had  been  stew- 
ard of  steamboats  in  the  United  States,  and  I  had 
travelled  often  with  him  before. 

We  were  now  at  sea,  with  a  clear  sky  and  fair 
prospects,  and  having  fair  weather  during  the  pas- 
sage, we  landed  at  New-Orleans  on  the  eighth  day, 
at  11  P.M.  With  feelings  which  do  not  often  occur 
in  one's  life,  we  once  more  leaped  upon  freedom's 
soil ;  and  as  we  required  neither  clearance  or  por- 
ters, we  wended  our  way  up  town,  and  called  into 
the  first  open  "  drinkery." 

Here  the  scene  changed.  These  very  men,  I 
among  the  rest,  who,  a  few  short  weeks  before, 
would  have  given  a  pint  of  their  blood  for  a  gill  of 
the  most  miserable  brandy  ever  distilled,  now  want, 
one  a  "  sherry  cobbler"  one  a  "  Tom  and  Jerry"  and 
another  a  "  hail  storm ;"  and  all  concluded  that  a 
little  rose  water  round  the  edge  of  the  cut  glass 
would  make  it  go  the  better.  How  comparative  is 
human  happiness ! 

Having  taken  our  drink,  we  passed  on  to  the  St. 
Charles  Hotel,  and  called  for  a  bed  each  with  the 
most  Republican  independence.  The  barkeeper,  on 
ringing  for  the  servant  to  show  us  rooms,  seemed  to 
be  impressed  with  some  of  the  steward's  misgivings, 
and  as  we  started  ofT,  said,  "  Gentlemen,  it  is  a  rule 
of  the  house  to  pay  in  advance  for  tumbling  the 
beds."     We  replied,  "All  right,  landlord:  we  are  a 


REMAINING    COUNTRYMEN    IN    MEXICO.         369 

suspicious-looking  set,"  and  threw  him  a  dollar  each. 
The  next  day  Colonels  Win.  M.  Beal  and  Durochea 
generously  gave  me  money  to  ration  my  comrades, 
and  in  two  days  after  we  were  again  upon  the  "  deep 
blue  sea"  with  Captain  Furgarson,  sailing  for  the 
"  Lone  Star." 

The  sixth  day  we  landed  off  the  Brazos,  where, 
soon  after,  Captain  Reese  and  Dan  were  taken 
down  with  the  severest  kind  of  fever,  which  they 
had  contracted  at  Vera  Cruz,  and  with  great  difficulty 
recovered  from,  while  my  fellow-citizens  elected  me 
to  the  more  pleasant  excitement  of  the  Congress  Hall. 
Reese  has  since  married  a  charming  lady,  and  is 
making  cotton-bales  upon  the  banks  of  Cedar  Lake ; 
while  Dan,  true  to  his  first  promise,  is  again  upon 
the  Mexican  frontier  with  Captain  Hays,  ready  to 
take  his  change  out  of  the  "  blanketed  nation." 

Let  us  now  turn  to  inquire  after  the  main  body 
of  our  countrymen-prisoners;  and  we  do  so  with 
feelings  of  mournful  sorrow,  with  a  heart  overwhelm- 
ed with  sadness.  We  go  back  to  the  prisons  of 
San  Luis  Potosi,  and  find  them  covered  with  rags 
and  filth,  loaded  with  vermin,  and  worn  down  with 
hunger  and  all  the  multiplied  cruelties  of  their  cap- 
tors. We  trace  their  bloody  path  south  three  hun- 
dred miles,  through  the  scorching  plains  of  Mexico, 
by  the  unburied  bones  of  many  noble  souls  who 
sunk  under  a  task  more  than  human.  We  see  the 
brave  and  dauntless  Cameron  taken  out  upon  this 
path  and  murdered  for  no  other  cause  than  his  bra- 

3  A 


370   DESTITUTION,  SUFFERINGS,  AND  DEATH. 

very.  We  see  the  remainder  herded  together  like 
beasts  of  burden,  and  driven  forth  into  the  streets 
with  sticks  and  bayonets  by  brutal  overseers,  as 
scavengers  of  filth  too  horrible  to  contemplate.  We 
see  their  manly  frames  worn  down  by  an  insufficient 
allowance  of  the  offal  of  a  rotten  population.  As 
the  opposite  plate  will  show,  which  was  drawn  from 
life  by  our  indefatigable  fellow -prisoner,  Charles 
M'Laughlin,  we  see  them  heavily  ironed,  working 
upon  a  pavement  in  front  of  the  archbishop's  palace 
at  Tacubaya ;  and  what  was  still  more  grating  to 
their  feelings  was  to  be  gazed  upon  from  their 
coaches  by  the  yellow,  pepper-eating,  demi-savages, 
as  if  they  had  been  so  many  hyenas.  We  trace 
most  of  the  survivors,  naked  and  emaciated,  two 
hundred  miles  east,  to  the  dark,  cold  dungeons  of 
Perote ;  the  balance  to  San  Juan  de  Ulloa,  to  be 
offered  up  as  a  certain  sacrifice  to  the  vomito,  that 
universal  malaria  of  death.  We  follow  around  the 
massive  castle  walls  of  Perote  upon  the  north,  and 
in  the  bottom  of  the  great  ditch  find  newly-stirred 
earth.  Here,  underneath  the  loose  sand,  without  a 
plank  to  cover  their  bones  or  a  stone  to  mark  the 
place — without  the  last  sad  rites  of  burial,  in  a  spot 
not  only  unconsecrated,  but  cursed  by  a  fanatical 
priesthood,  lie  the  remains  of  the  best  spirits  of  our 
country.  Here,  in  a  foreign  land,  in  a  priest-ridden 
nation,  and  in  full  view  of  the  eternal  snows  of  Ora- 
zaba,  repose  the  bones  of  fathers,  brothers,  husbands, 
and  sons  of  Texians — here  we  helped  to  deposite 


£-;(il;  ;'■■■■/', 


u 


FN 


1=1 


S£$S£ 


PERFIDY    OF    HOUSTON.  37] 

Booker  and  Jackson,  Trapnal  and  Crews,  Saunders, 
Gray,  Trimble,  and  a  long  list  of  others.  Peace  to 
their  ashes,  and  a  nation's  gratitude  to  their  memo- 
Ties  !  But  oh  !  how  the  heart  sickens  at  perfidy  the 
most  unparalleled,  when  we  trace  these  bloody  mur- 
ders, starvation,  and  deaths  to  the  President  of  our 
own  country  !  I  would  to  God  that  a  due  regard  to 
truth,  as  well  as  justice  to  the  memories  of  these 
brave  men,  would  allow  me  to  throw  the  mantle  of 
eternal  darkness  over  the  sequel ;  if  so,  I  would  bury 
this  most  horrible  conclusion  in  lasting  oblivion,  for 
my  country's  credit.  It  is,  however,  my  task  to 
register  this  bloody  tale,  and  I  have  no  option  but 
in  truth;  and  when  President  Houston  has  been 
charged  as  the  cause  of  the  sufife rings  and  murder 
of  our  countrymen,  for  our  country's  honour  it  has 
been  too  clearly  proven.  (See  Appendix  Nos.  II. 
and  VI.) 

We  still  look  after  the  surviving  half  of  the  brave 
band  of  Mier,  and  find  them  in  the  cheerless  cells 
of  Perote,  living  skeletons,  without  clothing  enough 
to  hide  their  nakedness;  and  what  language  do  we 
hear  from  them  1  Though  they  feel  mortified  and 
indignant  at  their  president's  denunciation  of  them, 
and  his  heartless  usurpation  of  the  laws  of  their 
Congress  in  withholding  their  supplies,  yet  there  is 
but  one  sentiment,  one  language  among  them,  and 
that  is,  "  The  honour  and  liberty  of  their  country!* 
At  all  times,  all  occasions,  and  under  all  circum- 
stances, when  hunger  has  pressed  them  most,  when 


372       TREASONABLE    ARMISTICE    WITH    MEXICO. 

Death  made  no  sham  visits  to  their  gloomy  abodes, 
boldly  did  they  publish  this  sentiment.  Time  after 
time  did  they  write  home  to  their  countrymen,  "Let 
no  consideration  of  us  forfeit  your  country's  honour. 
Let  us  rot  in  these  dungeons  ere  you  concede  one 
inch  to  these  coloured  barbarians."  And  when 
there  was  one  recreant  slave  among  them,  who  fos- 
tered a  coward  and  a  traitor's  heart  so  servile  as  to 
beg  his  liberty  at  his  country's  dishonour,  he  was 
denounced  by  the  others  with  universal  execration.* 

I  believe  that  I  may  safely  assert,  from  my  inti- 
mate knowledge  of  the  Mier  men,  that  two  among 
them  could  not  have  been  found  who  would  not 
have  preferred  the  most  cruel  death  to  signing, 
as  the  representatives  of  their  government,  the  late 
infamous  armistice  acknowledging  Texas  a  "  De- 
partment of  Mexico."  And  though  owerwhelm- 
ing  public  opinion  in  Texas  has  driven  President 
Houston  to  disavow  any  such  authority  on  the  part 
of  his  commissioners,  yet  it  is  perfectly  clear  that 
this  commission  ivas  created  by  him  and  sent  into 
Mexico,  based  upon  the  propositions  which  "  the 
lawyer  Robinson"  bore  from  Santa  Anna,  and  no 
other.f 

Yet  these  are  the  men  of  whom  President  Hous- 

*  This  was  "  the  lawyer  Robinson,"  one  of  the  Bexar  prisoners, 
whom  Santa  Anna  despatched  to  Texas  to  bring  her  back  to  acknowl- 
edge the  "supremacy  of  Mexico." 

t  Vide  Correspondence  upon  this  subject  between  Santa"  Anna,  his 
minister  of  War  and  Marine,  Tornel,  and  the  Honourable  Mr.  Doyle,  the 
British  minister  in  Mexico.    Appendix  No.  III. 


PRISONERS    ESCAPE    FROM    PEROTE.  373 

ton  caused  a  part  to  be  murdered,  and  others  to 
starve,  by  violently  withholding  from  them  the  bread 
which  the  representatives  of  their  countrymen  liber- 
ally voted  them,  while  he,  in  open  violation  of  the 
Constitution,  dipped  his  hand  into  the  public  chest, 
and  furnished  his  commissioners  means  to  go  to 
Mexico  to  acknowledge  that  we  were  no  longer  a 
sovereign  nation,  but  "the  Department  of  Texas." 
(See  Appendix  No.  VI.) 

*  *  ***** 

On  the  25th  of  March,  1844,  precisely  one  year 
from  the  date  of  the  bloody  black-bean  lottery,  the 
following  sixteen  of  our  Mier  prisoners  made  their 
escape  from  Perote,  out  of  the  same  cell  from  which 
we  escaped  on  the  2d  of  July  previously:  A.  B. 
Laforge,  Cyrus  K.  Gleason,  John  Johnson,  Edward 
Kean,  Richard  Kean,  Wiley  Jones,  William  Moore, 
T.  Smith,  E.  D.  Wright,  Francis  Arthur,  John 
Toops,  William  T.  Runyan,  John  Tanney,  Wil- 
liam H.  Frensley,  Stephen  Goodman,  and  William 
Wynn.  The  first-named  nine  succeeded  in  reach- 
ing Texas,  and  the  remaining  seven  were  recaptu- 
red and  carried  back  to  prison. 

An  account  of  this  escape  is  the  best  commenta- 
ry upon  the  character  of  our  people.  Their  daring 
is  only  equalled  by  their  never-tiring  perseverance, 
and  their  capability  to  overcome  the  most  appalling 
emergency. 

From  the  time  of  our  escape  in  July,  the  officers 
were  constantly  upon  the  qui  mm.     They  would  a 


374    HOW  THEY  EFFECTED  THEIR  ESCAPE. 

dozen  times  per  day  enter  the  cells  of  our  men,  and 
examine  the  walls  with  the  most  minute  care,  not 
thinking  it  possible  that  there  could  be  any  other 
mode  of  escape.  In  this  they  were  much  mistaken. 
During  that  terrible  malady  of  hard  ivork  and  starva- 
tion which  swept  off  so  many  of  our  men,  the  gov- 
ernor granted  the  survivors  permission  to  cover  their 
pavement,  floor  with  heavy  boards,  being  softer  to 
sleep  upon  than  stones.  They  then  conceived  the 
plan  of  sinking  a  perpendicular  shaft  through  the 
pavement  of  their  floor  some  forty  feet  deep,  and 
tunnelling  underneath  the  main  wall  so  as  to  reach 
the  bottom  of  the  great  moat  upon  the  outside. 
Tremendous  an  undertaking  as  this  was,  these 
bold  men  completed  it  in  forty  nights,  for  they 
could  not  work  upon  it  in  the  daytime. 

This  work,  which  was  worthy  of  an  experienced 
engineer,  with  all  the  implements  for  sapping,  they 
commenced  by  sawing  a  trapdoor  out  of  one  of  the 
boards  upon  the  floor  with  a  piece  of  tin,  which 
fitted  so  exactly  that  the  officers  never  discovered 
it,  though  they  often  stood  directly  upon  the  place. 
From  this  trapdoor  they  commenced  digging  the 
perpendicular  shaft  with  sharp  sticks  and  small 
knives,  and  as  they  proceeded  downward,  the  dis- 
engaged earth  was  elevated  by  a  hair  rope  being 
tied  to  one  of  their  small  provision  baskets.  This 
earth,  when  drawn  up,  was  so  nicely  distributed  un- 
der the  board  floor  as  to  raise  them  all  equally,  and 
thereby  not  attract  the  notice  of  the  guards. 


DIFFICULTIES    ENCOUNTERED. 

One  great  difficulty  they  had  to  encounter  well- 
nigh  defeated  their  enterprise.  This  was,  that  after 
they  had  descended  to  a  considerable  depth,  the  car- 
bonic acid  gas,  which  was  generated  from  the  coal 
fires  used  in  the  castle,  being  heavier  than  the  at- 
mosphere, descended  into  their  pit,  in  which  no  one 
could  labour  but  a  very  few  minutes  before  he  had 
to  ascend  to  prevent  suffocation.  Notwithstanding 
this  serious  impediment,  there  was  always  a  fresh 
hand  to  supply  the  place  of  the  last  labourer.  Thus 
the  work  progressed  for  many  nights,  when  the  vol- 
ume of  this  destructive  gas  became  so  deep  that  it 
would  nearly  exhaust  one  before  he  could  reach  the 
bottom  of  the  shaft.  In  this  situation,  when  the 
work  progressed  by  fractional  parts  of  inches,  it 
would  seem  that  a  kind  Providence  directed  the 
course  of  the  tunnel  so  as  to  intersect  with  a  gopher 
hole,  which  communicated  with  the  bottom  of  the 
great  moat  upon  the  outside,  and  through  which 
this  deadly  gas  escaped,  thus  affording  the  sappers 
power  to  push  the  work  with  greater  energy. 

On  the  night  of  the  24th  they  were  nearly  through, 
and  all  their  preparations  being  made,  the  following 
night  they  passed  out  and  ascended  the  outer  wall 
of  the  moat,  and  crossed  over  the  chevaux  de  frize 
as  we  had  previously  done.  Thus  did  these  heroes 
celebrate  the  first  anniversary  of  the  "  decimation," 
and  make  the  25th  another  memorable  day  of  their 
captivity.  On  the  25th  we  had  crossed  the  Rio 
Grande,  and  drove  Ampudia's  legions  behind  the 


376  "  guts"  in  trouble. 

walls  of  Mien  on  the  25th,  the  most  cold-blooded 
murder  of  the  nineteenth  century  was  perpetrated 
upon  our  seventeen  decimated  countrymen :  on  the 
25th  we  entered  the  gloomy  cells  of  Perote;  and  on 
the  25th  the  noble  Cameron  was  murdered. 

The  morning  after  the  escape,  the  remainder  of 
our  prisoners,  who  looked  upon  it  as  another  triumph 
of  Texian  prowess,  did  not  wait  for  the  guards  to 
find  it  out,  but  ran  to  Guts,  and  said  that  "  another 
sixteen  of  the  Texians  have  gone,  seiior." 

"  Hai  Dios !  Diez  y  seis  fatten  ?  Carajo  !" — 
My  God  !  Sixteen  missing  1  O  villains  !  was  his 
first  exclamation  ;  but  at  the  thought  of  the  gloomy 
dungeons  of  San  Juan  de  Ulloa  which  stared  him  in 
the  face,  he  burst  forth  into  a  roaring  cry.  The 
tears  rolled  swiftly  down  his  fat  face  and  fell  upon 
his  still  fatter  belly,  which  laboured  like  a  bellows, 
to  the  no  small  amusement  of  the  Republicans,  who 
wellnigh  split  theirs  with  laughter.  Had  Heraclitus 
been  a  prisoner,  one  peep  at  Guts  would  have  made 
him  laugh. 

The  whole  castle  was  instantly  in  an  uproar. 
The  governor  came  around  to  assure  himself  of 
a  work  which  all  said  the  devil  had  a  hand  in. 
When  he  saw  it,  he  exclaimed,  "  Mucho  Irabajo" — 
much  work,  and  consoled  himself  by  saying  that 
"  they  had  a  finished  engineer  to  conduct  it." 

The  remainder  of  our  men  were  put  upon  their 
examination  as  to  the  time  they  were  at  work 
upon  it,  and  testified  that  they  were  forty  nights  in 


ABUSING  SANTA  ANNAS  "  CONFIDENCE.,,    377 

completing  it.  These  forty  nights  were  rendered 
to  the  government  as  three  nights,  for  the  longer 
time  would  have  procured  both  the  governor  and  all 
the  other  officers  quarters  in  the  dungeons  of  San 
Juan.  As  feasibly  as  this  escape  was  accounted  for 
to  the  President  Santa  Anna,  some  one  had  to  atone 
for  it ;  and  Captain  Peneder,  one  of  their  most  hu- 
mane officers,  was  sent  prisoner  to  San  Juan,  where 
he  soon  fell  a  victim  to  the  vomita. 

It  was  this  escape  which  Santa  Anna,  in  his  let- 
ter to  the  United  States'  minister,  called  "  abusing 
the  generous  confidence  of  my  government."  Thus 
casting  from  their  limbs,  each,  twenty  pounds  of 
iron,  eluding  the  vigilance  of  multiplied  guards,  and 
escaping  through  the  walls  of  the  strongest  fortifica- 
tion in  his  empire,  from  the  menial  service  of  slaves 
and  brutes,  was  abusing  the  "generous  confidence'  of 
his  government !  Was  such  a  perversion  of  truth 
ever  perpetrated  by  the  head  of  any  other  nation  1 

Time  rolled  heavily  on,  and  our  remaining  pris- 
oners were  treated  with  increased  cruelties,  when  a 
ray  of  hope  beamed  in  upon  them.  This  was  the 
reported  annexation  of  Texas  with  their  father-land. 
This  news  caused  great  joy,  and  it  was  manifested 
in  more  ways  than  one.  Our  charcoal  sketchers 
drew  upon  their  prison  walls  the  "  lone  star"  of 
Texas  surrounded  by  the  constellation  of  the  north- 
ern republics.  This  put  the  Mexican  officers  in  the 
greatest  rage.  With  true  Quixotic  boldness,  they 
charged  this  mighty  galaxy  sword  in  hand,  and  after 

3B 


378      BIRTHDAY    "  COURTESY"    OF    SANTA    ANNA. 

cruelly  belabouring  the  plastering,  had  it  whitewashed 
over.  No  sooner  had  these  bold  caballeros  turned 
their  backs,  than  another  and  another  flag  sprung 
from  the  deathblows  of  the  last,  until  they  found  it 
worse  than  useless  to  war  upon  this  Phoenix-like 
spirit. 

Heavy  time  brought  with  it  another  disappoint- 
ment, but  hope  revived  with  the  return  of  Santa 
Anna's  birthday,  which  was  succeeded  by  disap- 
pointment still  worse. 

The  United  States  minister,  General  Thompson, 
was  upon  his  return  home,  and  Santa  Anna,  in  part- 
ing courtesy,  placed  the  Bexar  prisoners  at  his  dis- 
position, denouncing  the  others,  at  the  same  time,  in 
all  the  eloquence  of  his  court  abuse.  This  was  ad- 
ding insult  to  misfortune,  and  they  had  redress  from 
neither  but  in  the  bold  speech  of  freemen :  they  both 
wrote  and  published,  regardless  of  all  the  refinements 
of  his  cruelty. 

The  United  States  legation  was  left  in  charge  of 
the  young,  accomplished,  and  talented  Benjamin  E. 
Green,  who  deserves  the  thanks  of  all  Texians  for 
his  bold  advocacy  of  their  rights,  and  the  many  kind 
courtesies  extended  to  their  suffering  countrymen. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  summer  of  1844,  Gov- 
ernor Shannon,  the  present  minister  from  the  United 
States,  reached  Vera  Cruz,  and  upon  his  arrival  at 
Perote,  though  in  the  night,  obtained  permission 
from  the  governor  of  the  castle,  went  into  each  of 
the  cells  where  our  prisoners  were  confined,  and 


LETTER  OF  SANTA  ANNA.  379 

made  the  most  critical  inquiry  into  their  condition. 
This  conduct  was  highly  praiseworthy,  and  at  the 
same  time  that  it  manifested  the  warm  feelings  of  a 
countryman,  it  showed  a  boldness  worthy  of  his 
country  and  his  station.  He  promised  our  prison- 
ers his  devotion  to  their  interest,  nor  was  that  prom- 
ise neglected.  His  first  official  note  was  to  Presi- 
dent Santa  Anna,  asking  for  their  liberation :  to 
which  note  the  President  returned  the  following  an- 
swer, which  we  here  insert,  as  the  most  finished 
compendium  of  hypocrisy,  vanity,  falsehood,  and 
malice  to  be  found  in  the  annals  of  diplomacy. 

"  National  Palace,  September  5,  1844. 
"Wilson  Shannon,  Envoy,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Much  esteemed  Sir, — I  have  received  the  very 
friendly  and  attentive  letter  which  you  addressed  to 
me  under  the  date  of  the  30th  ult,  respecting  the 
liberty  of  the  Texian  prisoners  confined  in  the  for- 
tress of  Perote. 

"  In  reply,  I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you,  that, 
as  well  for  the  efforts  made  on  various  occasions  by 
the  members  of  Congress  of  the  United  States,  as 
through  respect  for  Messrs.  Jackson,  Thompson, 
Clay,  and  others  of  respectability,  I  have  liberated 
many  of  the  Texian  prisoners  who  were  captured 
in  various  actions  and  encounters  between  the  Mex- 
ican army  and  the  adventurers,  and  now  only  those 
are  retained  in  prison  who,  abusing  the  kindness 
extended  them,  have  attempted  to  escape  by  assas- 
sinating the  Mexican  soldiers  who  guarded  them. 


380  "  magnanimity"  of  santa  anna. 

These  criminals  deserved  death,  and  nothing  but  the 
mildness  and  magnanimity  natural  to  the  Mexican 
character*  has  prevented  its  application.  Justice, 
however,  demands  that  they  should  be  treated  with 

*  The  following  incident,  related  to  the  writer  by  Captain  S.  C.  Lyon 
and  Mr.  Harvey,  gentlemen  of  unimpeachable  veracity,  is  strikingly  il- 
lustrative of  Santa  Anna's  vindictive  hatred  to  the  Texians.  After  their 
liberation  on  the  16th  of  September  at  Perote,  they  were  making  their 
way,  via  Vera  Cruz,  to  take  shipping  home,  and  had  proceeded  twenty 
leagues  below  Jalapa,  when  they  stopped  at  a  house  upon  the  roadside 
for  a  drink  of  water.  At  this  place  they  saw  a  coach  which  had  just  pre- 
viously stopped  to  change  mules,  accompanied  by  a  guard  of  about 
twenty  lancers.  In  the  house  was  an  individual  in  citizen's  dress,  with  a 
gold  band  around  his  cap,  who,  upon  Harvey's  entering  with  his  hat  off, 
asked  if  he  was  a  Texian.  "  Yes,  sir,"  was  the  reply.  Turning  quickly 
to  Captain  Lyon,  he  said,  "  Are  you  likewise  ]"  "  Si,  Senor,"  the  cap- 
tain politely  replied  ;  when  the  great  unknown,  no  less  a  personage  than 
Santa  Anna,  the  President  of  Mexico,  aimed  a  blow  at  his  head  with  his 
walking-cane,  which  was  promptly  caught  upon  the  arm,  the  captain  at 
the  same  time  stepping  out  of  the  reach  of  a  second  ;  whereupon  Santa 
Anna  turned  against  Harvey,  who  was  still  uncovered  inside  of  the  door, 
and  violently  assaulted  him.  The  President's  vengeance  possibly  found 
some  pretext  at  Captain  Lyon's  replacing  his  hat  after  the  meeting  sal- 
utation, but  those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  natural  urbanity  of  this 
gentleman  can  find  no  excuse  for  conduct  in  the  Mexican  despot  which 
would  be  a  disgrace  to  the  veriest  tyrant  of  Arabia.  After  thus  wreaking 
his  vengeance  upon  two  unoffending,  worn-down  prisoners,  whom  his 

"  MILDNESS  AND   MAGNANIMITY,  NATURAL  TO  THE  MEXICAN  CHARACTER,"  had 

starved  two  years  in  dungeons,  he  drove  them  off,  under  the  most  vulgar 
oaths,  without  one  drop  of  water.  At  the  same  time  that  the  reader's 
indignation  cannot  fail  to  be  greatly  provoked  at  such  a  brutal  outrage, 
language  suitable  to  it  would,  perhaps,  illy  become  these  pages. 

In  the  face  of  these  and  a  thousand  other  brutal  outrages  committed 
by  the  dictator,  as  well  upon  English  subjects  as  others,  such  is  poli- 
tics, that  the  Queen  of  Great  Britain  considers  him  a  fit  representative 
of  St.  George's  cross.  The  enlightened  throughout  the  world  will  con- 
cur in  the  opinion  that  this  proud  and  most  honourable  badge  was  most 
unfitly  bestowed.* 

*  See  Appendix  No.  IX. 


381 

greater  severity  than  those  who  have  not  aggravated 
their  faults  by  stabbing  the  innocent  soldiers  who 
guarded  them.  This  is  all  that  I  ought  to  reply  to 
your  esteemed  communication;  and  in  having  the 
honour  to  do  so,  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  subscri- 
bing myself,  for  the  first  time,  your  most  affectionate, 
attentive,  and  constant  servant, 

"  Antonio  Lopez  de  Santa  Anna." 

Governor  Shannon  did  not  despair  of  success 
even  at  the  receipt  of  this  vindictive  tirade,  but 
wrote  to  our  prisoners  to  "  be  patient,  and  wait 
a  while  longer,"  until  he  made  another  trial.  In  a 
few  days  thereafter  they  received  the  joyous  news 
of  their  liberation ;  and  on  the  16th  of  September, 
the  governor  of  the  castle,  representing  the  "  mag- 
nanimous nation,"  and  acting  under  instructions 
"  natural  to  Mexican  magnanimity,"  gave  each  of  the 
Texians  one  dollar  to  bear  his  expenses  to  Texas, 
being  a  distance  less  than  two  thousand  miles,  and 
then  turned  them  upon  the  open  common  as  if  they 
had  been  so  many  herbivorous  animals.  One  hun- 
dred and  twenty  was  the  aggregate  number  released, 
of  whom  there  were  at  Perote  105,  Vera  Cruz  10, 
Mexico  3,  and  Matamoras  2.   (See  Appendix  No.  V.) 

In  solemn,  melancholy  duty,  we  again  turn  to  in- 
quire where  are  the  balance  of  that  brave  band  who 
fought  at  Mier  and  Salado  ?  My  heart  sickens  at 
the  answer.  Their  bones  are  strewed  from  the  banks 
of  the  Rio  Bravo  to  the  bottom  of  the  great  sewer  of 


382  REFLECTIONS. 

Perote — they  are  washed  by  the  grand  river  of  the 
north,  and  widely  scattered  in  the  mother  mount- 
ains— they  are  bleaching  upon  the  battle-fields  of 
Mier  and  Salado,  and  whiten  the  commons  of  Vica- 
rio,  Potosi,  St.  Miguel  a  Grande,  Dolores,  and  San 
Juan  del  Rio.  Peace  !  peace  be  with  their  ashes  ! 
Eternal  honour  and  gratitude  to  their  memories ! 


SUPPLEMENTAL  CHAPTER. 

Reflections  upon  the  Present  Political  and  probable  Future  Relations  of 
Texas,  Mexico,  and  the  United  States. — Annexation. — Abolition. — 
Southern  Boundary. 

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  enter  into  a  detail  of  the 
present  condition  either  of  the  government  or  peo- 
ple of  Mexico.  Prescott,  Mayer,  Kendall,  and  other 
late  writers,  whose  opportunities  have  been  far  great- 
er than  mine,  have  so  recently  and  so  ably  occupied 
this  whole  field,  that  were  I  to  attempt  it  would  but 
be  to  weary  the  public  with  an  oft  told,  and,  maybe, 
a  worse  told  tale. 

The  late  radical  change  in  the  government  of 
Mexico  from  a  seeming  republicanism  to  an  avow- 
ed military  dictatorship  ;*  her  position  to  Texas,  and 
that  of  Texas  both  to  her  and  the  United  States 
of  America,  as  well  as  to  other  nations,  forces  upon 
me  some  general  remarks,  which  may  not  be  out  of 
place  at  this  interesting  juncture  in  the  politics  of 

*  The  reader  will  recollect  that  this  was  written  (1844)  during  Santa  Anna's 
dictatorship. 


REFLECTIONS.  383 

these  several  governments.  From  what  I  saw  in  a 
zigzag  march  of  more  than  fifteen  hundred  miles 
through  many  of  the  Departments  of  Mexico,  these 
reflections  were  convincing  to  my  mind,  and  I  offer 
them  to  the  public  as  I  received  them. 

We  entered  the  northern  boundary  of  Mexico  at 
the  28th  degree  of  north  latitude,  and  meandered  the 
magnificent  Rio  Bravo  several  hundred  miles  to  its 
mouth ;  thence  through  Caidereta,  Monterey,  and 
Saltillo ;  thence  across  the  Sierra  Madre,  via  Mat- 
aguala,  to  San  Luis  Potosi ;  thence  via  Dolores, 
San  Juan,  Miguel  a  Grande,  to  the  capital ;  thence 
via  San  Martin,  La  Puebla,  and  Perote,  to  Vera 
Cruz  ;  and  what  do  we  behold  ?  A  geographical 
area  capable  of  supporting  three  hundred  and  eighty 
millions  of  souls,  with  seven  thousand  five  hundred 
miles  of  seacoast,  and  every  variety  of  soil  and  cli- 
mate, from  the  15th  to  the  42d  degree  of  north  lati- 
tude, containing  a  mineral  wealth  unknown  to  any 
other  portion  of  the  globe,  and  a  capability  of  agri- 
cultural product  which  has  not  yet  entered  into 
political  estimate. 

In  this  vast  circumference  of  the  most  choice  por- 
tion of  God's  earth,  we  find  a  population  of  seven 
millions  of  souls,  scattered  here  and  there,  without  the 
moral  ability  to  appreciate  the  unequal  boon.  Of 
this  seven  millions  of  people,  we  find  twelve  out  of 
each  thirteen  in  a  state  of  squalid  misery,  wretched 
ignorance,  and  want,  rarely  known,  and  never  before 
paralleled  in  the  history  of  the  world  where  the  ele- 


384  REFLECTIONS. 

merits  of  competence  were  so  abundant ;  we  see  a 
small  fraction  of  the  remaining  thirteenth  holding,  in 
a  most  unjust  and  unwise  proportion,  benefits  which 
should  be  more  diffuse  as  the  aggregate  happiness 
of  the  whole  is  desirable  ;  we  see  the  bulk  of  this 
population,  sparse  and  well  located  as  it  is,  since  the 
days  of  the  Conquest  uniformly  sinking  lower  and 
lower  in  the  scale  of  human  degradation,  without 
one  scintillation  of  energy  to  foretell  a  change ;  we 
see  this  population,  in  the  last  twenty  years — unlike 
its  great  and  prosperous  neighbour  of  the  north,  doub- 
ling its  numbers — absolutely  reduced  in  the  aggregate 
twelve  per  cent.  ;  we  see  their  boasted  eight  mill- 
ions at  the  completion  of  the  Revolution  reduced  to 
a  small  fraction  over  seven,  with  increased  taxes, 
with  diminished  product  of  metals,  with  an  agricul- 
ture which  has  gone  back  from  bad  to  worse,  with 
ninety  millions  of  public  debt,  the  most  of  which  is 
due  a  foreign  creditor  with  the  will  and  the  power 
to  force  its  payment ;  we  see  an  unwise  accumula- 
tion of  wealth  in  the  priesthood,  who  hoard  from  a 
fanatical  laity  with  a  mania  which  increases  with 
age ;  we  see  a  foreign  commerce,  the  profits  of 
which  is  a  perpetual  drain  upon  the  body  politic, 
with  a  government  of  bayonets,  the  support  of  which 
is  death  to  the  citizen :  in  fine,  we  see  a  nation  of 
abject  ignorance  and  slavery,  without  a  Constitution, 
and  governed  with  the  sword.  Thus  it  is  we  see 
Mexico,  without  the  hope  of  advancement,  and  ev- 
erything receding  to  a  state  far  worse  than  aboriginal 


REFLECTIONS.  385 

simplicity,  because  in  its  backward  march,  without 
the  virtues  of  the  primitive  man,  it  carries  with  it  the 
vices  and  corruptions  of  civilized  artifice. 

If  we  are  asked  to  what  these  things  are  attribu- 
table, it  would  be  an  unsatisfactory  answer  to  say 
that  such  is  the  history  of  the  Spanish  colonies. 
Let  us  look  beyond. 

Upon  the  discovery  of  the  new  continent,  the 
bright  metals  allured  a  court,  then  governed  by  the 
fanatical  dogmas  of  the  Romish  Church,  to  a  belief 
of  unceasing  wealth.  That  court,  in  extending  its 
colonial  government  over  such  untold  treasures,  as 
well  from  the  religious  fanaticism  which  governed 
the  sixteenth  century  as  from  an  equal  desire  to 
possess  itself  permanently  thereof,  threw  its  govern- 
ment into  the  control  of  a  priesthood,  whose  long- 
settled  policy  has  been  to  govern  by  the  suppression 
of  the  Bible,  and  through  the  ignorance  of  the  gov- 
erned. This  policy,  adhered  to  with  such  unceasing 
aim  for  three  hundred  years,  at  the  same  time  that 
it  made  the  court  and  the  Church  the  recipients  of 
the  wealth,  sunk  in  a  reverse  ratio  the  subject  both 
in  ignorance  and  want.  A  system  so  erroneous  in 
its  commencement  could  have  no  cure  short  of  uni- 
versal dethronement  of  the  power  first  instituting  it ; 
and  how  was  that  power  to  be  reached,  when  it  was 
the  moral  soul  of  the  governed  1 

The  Church  in  Mexico,  whose  existence  depends 
upon  its  unchanged  policy,  is  the  moral  soul  of  the 
people ;  and  were  it  to  allow  learning  to  the  million, 

3  C 


386  REFLECTIONS. 

it  would  permit  a  transfer  of  that  great  moral  lever 
by  which  it  governs.  Thus,  while  its  fanaticism 
debases,  its  cupidity  impoverishes  the  many.  With 
its  hundreds  of  millions  of  wealth,  it  teaches  the 
strict  doctrine  that  upon  your  conduct  depends  your 
redemption  from  purgatory,  and  without  my  will  you 
cannot  enter  heaven.  Is  it  strange,  then,  that  peo- 
ple under  such  a  belief  should  be  patient  under 
worldly  sufferings  1  The  whole  history  of  the 
Mexican  Revolution  will  show,  that  where  the 
priest  excited  opposition  to  the  mother  state,  it  was 
for  the  purpose  of  concentrating  more  power  in 
themselves,  to  do  which  they  invariably  made  use 
of  their  holiness  as  the  surer  and  more  effectual 
means.  If  the  policy  of  the  Church,  as  it  has  the 
power  to  prevent  it,  is  thus  opposed  to  change,  where 
is  the  remedy  1  Certainly  not  in  those  whose  souls 
have  to  reach  heaven  through  that  channel.  The 
history  of  many  nations  in  time  past  answers  the 
question ;  some  other  people,  more  skilled  in  the  arts 
of  war  and  the  science  of  government,  ambitious  of 
the  possession  of  so  choice  a  portion  of  the  earth, 
will  extend  their  arms  and  government  over  it ;  for 
where  there  is  so  much  to  tempt  national  cupidity, 
a  pretext  for  war  is  never  wanting.  Here  this  ques- 
tion presents  itself. 

Is  the  present  moral  and  political  condition  of 
Mexico  already  so  low  as  to  justify  such  a  measure  1 

The  present  degraded  state  of  Mexico  is  perhaps 
a  sufficient  answer  to  this  question ;  but  in  this  age, 


REFLECTIONS.  387 

when  the  "  moral  opinion  of  the  world"  is  so  fre- 
quently talked  of,  and  possibly  more  respected  than 
formerly,  it  would  require  a  reasonable  pretext  in  a 
foreign  nation  to  assume  such  a  position. 

Great  Britain,  for  instance,  would,  upon  the  refu- 
sal of  Mexico  to  pay  her  sixty  millions  of  debt  to 
English  subjects,  and  to  extend  a  full  protection  to 
the  hundred  millions  of  English  manufacturing  and 
mining  capital,  have  a  better  pretext  to  extend  her 
laws  over  Mexico  than  she  had  in  most  of  her  East 
India  conquest,  or  in  forcing  opium  upon  the  Chi- 
nese. 

France,  perhaps,  would  have  as  good  a  pretext,  if 
the  late  arbitrary  act  of  the  Mexican  government 
against  the  French  subject  is  in  contravention  of 
existing  treaties,  as  it  is  grossly  violative  of  that  com- 
itas  inter  gentes  which  should  ever  exist. 

The  national  vicinage  between  the  United  States 
and  Mexico,  that  great  and  leading  neighbourhood 
policy  which  has  the  right  to  keep  off  a  stranger 
who  possibly  might  be  troublesome,  certainly  would 
give  the  former  the  right,  if  it  did  not  make  it  her 
imperative  duty,  to  possess  herself  of  that  which  a 
stranger  might.  This  policy,  called  "American" 
belongs  as  much  to  the  New,  as  that  called  the  "  bal- 
ance ofpoiver"  does  to  the  Old  World. 

If  a  decent  regard  for  the  "  moral  opinion  of  the 
world"  be  wanting  by  other  nations  to  make  such 
a  conquest  of  Mexico,  it  is  not  so  wanting  on  the 
part  of  Texas ;  a  nation,  though  small  at  present, 


388  REFLECTIONS. 

but  whose  destiny  will  extend  south  and  west  as 
surely  as  that  has  been  the  course  of  former  conquest. 

All  history  teaches  that  the  general  course  of  con- 
quest has  been  from  north  to  south.  It  was  so  in 
the  days  of  Tamerlane,  of  the  Goths  and  Vandals, 
and,  from  the  best  evidence  upon  the  subject,  it  has 
been  so  already  with  Mexico  herself.  Physiology 
also  instructs  us,  as  a  general  law,  that  animals  are 
more  daring  and  ferocious  in  high  than  in  low  lati- 
tudes ;  that  as  the  cold  climate  makes  it  the  more 
difficult  of  subsistence,  it  nerves  the  system  to  an 
energy  commensurate  to  the  want ;  that  while  the 
perpetual  produce  of  the  warm  climate  renders  such 
energy  unnecessary,  it  enervates  the  system  and  de- 
bases the  mind.  Nothing  can  be  more  true,  and  a 
knowledge  of  the  people  of  the  United  States  and 
Mexico  is  strikingly  illustrative  of  the  fact. 

Let  the  present  condition  of  the  former  nation, 
whose  population  has  increased  from  a  unit  to  twen- 
ty millions,  with  her  improved  state  of  agriculture, 
with  her  hundred  millions  per  annum  of  foreign  ex- 
ports, with  her  commerce  upon  every  sea,  with  her 
vast  strides  in  literature  and  science,  with  improve- 
ments in  the  art  of  war,  which  makes  an  era  as  im- 
portant as  the  invention  of  gunpowder,  compare 
with  the  latter  nation,  occupying  the  most  favoured 
location  upon  the  new  continent,  fronting  upon  both 
seas,  with  a  climate  adapted  to  vastly  more  exten- 
sive produce,  with  her  hills  and  mountains  filled  to 
overflowing  with  the  useful  and  precious  metals,  with 


REFLECTIONS.  389 

her  population  less  in  numbers  and  worse  in  con- 
dition than  in  the  beginning,  and  we  have  a  strong 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  this  remark. 

When  we  look  more  closely  into  the  individual 
habits  of  the  people,  the  remark  is  still  more  convin- 
cing. The  people  of  the  first  are  of  stouter  frames 
and  more  enduring  constitutions,  and,  upon  an  aver- 
age, sleep  only  one  third  of  their  lives,  while  those 
of  the  latter,  of  smaller  persons,  whose  constitutions 
and  minds,  from  generations  of  slothfulness,  have 
been  enervated,  for  want  of  mental  occupation  sleep 
two  thirds  of  theirs. 

Let  our  experience  follow  them  to  the  camp, 
where  we  have  met,  and  contrast  their  habits  with 
the  people  of  the  northern  nation.  Here  we  see 
the  Mexican  soldier  wrapped  in  his  blanket,  and 
shivering  in  the  sunshine,  while  the  Texian,  in  his 
shirt  sleeves  and  open  collar,  thinks  the  weather 
pleasant.  We  see  their  officers  with  a  cumbrous 
cortege,  and  all  the  paraphernalia  of  the  boudoir  to 
invite  sleep ;  while  the  Texian  officer,  with  his  sad- 
dle-blanket as  a  cover  and  his  saddle  for  a  pillow, 
indulges  only  when  Nature  can  no  longer  resist. 
The  Mexican  officer  looks  upon  his  huge  load  of 
bedding  as  essential  among  the  munitions  of  war  as 
the  Texian  does  upon  his  dry  powder  and  well-placed 
double  sights.  That  which  is  considered  so  essen- 
tial to  the  one,  is  looked  upon  by  the  other  as  a 
womanish  effeminacy  which  would  be  his  disgrace. 
The  former  rises  in  the  morning,  and,  with  a  piece 


390  REFLECTIONS. 

of  sweet  bread  as  large  as  one's  thumb,  drinks  his 
half  a  gill  of  chocolate,  which  serves  him  until  din- 
ner, when  the  enormous  quantity  of  red  peppers 
he  eats  stimulates  him  into  a  siesta,  which  he  looks 
upon  as  necessary  to  his  existence,  while  the  latter 
rises  from  his  solitary  blanket  ready  armed  and  spur- 
red, stows  away  his  couple  of  pounds  of  beef,  either 
with  or  without  bread,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  is 
ready  to  meet  the  consequences  of  the  day,  be  they 
pleasant  or  otherwise. 

These  are  the  nations  which  have  been  eight 
years  warring  against  each  other.  Mexico,  with  her 
seven  millions  of  people,  whose  course  has  been  un- 
productive of  favourable  result  in  this  war,  and  whose 
tendency  has  been  more  downward  than  at  any 
former  period  in  her  history,  is  still  pertinacious  in 
her  vain  desire  of  reconquest ;  while  Texas,  with 
her  twenty  thousand  souls,  threw  off  the  yoke — has 
increased  her  population  eight  or  ten  fold — multi- 
plied her  exports  beyond  her  imports — has  a  surplus 
of  corn  and  beef  vastly  more  than  the  wants  of  her 
people,  and  cheaper  than  in  any  other  portion  of  the 
civilized  earth.  With  this  rapidly-growing  power, 
already  strong,  and  bidding  so  soon  to  wield  a  giant's 
strength,  her  course  has  been  temporizing  and  weak 
beyond  measure.  When  Mexico  has  vainly  threat- 
ened Texas  with  annihilation — when  she  has  viola- 
ted every  principle  of  civilized  warfare  by  a  catalogue 
of  cruelties  the  most  unparalleled — when  she  has, 
time  after  time,  plundered  and  burned  our  towns  and 


REFLECTIONS.  391 

farmhouses — when  she  has  kidnapped  our  citizens 
and  carried  them  into  foreign  bondage — when  she 
has  offered  up  in  cold  blood  our  best  citizens  to  sa- 
tiate the  bloody  vengeance  of  a  despot,  it  has  been 
the  misfortune  of  Texas,  the  most  of  this  time,  to 
have  in  her  executive  chair  one  who  had  neither 
the  energy  nor  the  will  to  punish  these  cruelties. 
When  the  nation  called  upon  President  Houston  to 
do  so,  she  was  answered  in  deception,  and  by  him 
the  enemy  were  falsely  told  that  "  we  have  no  means 
of  prosecuting  the  war?  Then  comes  his  denun- 
ciation of  his  gallant  countrymen  of  Mier  ;  then  his 
proclamation  of  piracy  against  his  gallant  navy  ;  and, 
lastly,  his  thieving  copartnership  with  Colonel  Snive- 
ly's  expedition.  This  executive,  without  either  the 
energy  or  the  will  to  do  that  which  the  honour  and 
interest  of  the  country  required,  instead  of  boldly 
meeting  the  enemy  and  punishing  "  his  aggressions," 
commences  a  compound  negotiation  of  diplomatic 
frauds  as  disgraceful  to  the  nation  as  they  were  stu- 
pid in  their  author. 

At  the  same  time  that  the  Texas  executive  was 
begging  the  mediation  of  Great  Britain,  whose  price- 
was  beyond  his  gift,*  he  had  commissioners  beyond 

*  The  "  abolition  of  slavery"  was,  then,  the  price,  and  however  covertly 
the  Texas  executive  may  have  connived  at  the  measure,  he  dare  not 
openly  advocate  it.  More  recently  the  British  government  has  varied 
her  conditions  of  mediation,  and  it  is  but  a  variation.  She  seems  just 
now  tenacious  of  the  separate  nationality  of  Texas,  well  knowing  that 
her  Constitution  is  a  rope  of  sand  ;  that  in  six  months,  under  that  Con- 
stitution, a  preponderance  of  European  paupers  may  be  introduced,  with 
all  the  rights  of  citizenship  which  belong  to  that  few  whose  patriotism 


392  REFLECTIONS. 

the  Rio  Grande,  entering  into  a  disgraceful  and  trea- 
sonable armistice  with  Mexico  ;  and  while  he  would 
promise  benefits  to  other  nations,  the  public  will  of 
his  countrymen,  which  he  could  neither  control  nor 
resist,  offered  political  union  to  the  confederated  Re- 
publics of  the  North.* 

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  argue  the  good  or  evil 
which  might  result  from  such  a  union.  It  is  suffi- 
cient that  an  immense  majority  of  my  countrymen 
desired  it,  and,  whatever  may  be  the  result  of  their 
application,  duty  to  Texas  requires  me  to  defend  her 
against  the  slander  of  her  executive,  and  demonstrate 
her  entire  capability  of  defending  herself  successful- 
ly against  the  united  and  concentrated  power  of 
Mexico.  What  I  have  already  said  upon  this  sub- 
ject might,  with  good  reason,  be  considered  a  suffi- 
cient demonstration  of  this  position  ;  but  the  history 
of  this  whole  war  is  a  history  of  proofs  of  this  fact. 

and  blood  won  the  country ;  and  that,  when  thus  introduced,  and  thus 
equally  vested  with  the  rights  of  suffrage,  they  can  uproot  the  Constitu- 
tion and  abolish  slavery  with  that  legal  dictum  which  is  not  unfrequently 
the  despotism  of  the  majority.  No  sooner  did  the  British  government 
fail  by  a  direct  attack  to  carry  an  institution  so  closely  identified  with  the 
welfare  of  our  present  population,  than  she  commenced  another  assault 
by  a  political  strategy,  which,  if  the  people  of  Texas  are  true  to  them- 
selves, will  likewise  fail.  If  they  take,  as  it  is  their  first  duty  to  take, 
early  measures  to  amend  their  Constitution,  and  guarantee  themselves 
against  European  mendicancy,  then,  with  or  without  annexation,  Texas 
will  be  safe  against  such  strategy,  and  English  sappers  and  miners  will 
meet  as  signal  a  defeat  in  their  present  subterranean  movement.  The 
people  of  Texas  cannot  be  blind  as  to  the  extent  of  English  friendship, 
when  that  government  proposes,  through  her  mediation,  that  "  Mexico 
shall  acknowledge  Texas's  independence  upon  condition  that  the  latter  re- 
main a  separate  nation." 
*  See  Appendix  No.  VIII. 


REFLECTIONS.  393 

In  the  year  1835,  the  battles  of  Conception  and 
the  "grass-light,"  where  large  odds  were  driven  from 
the  field  by  Texians — the  same  year,  when  three 
hundred  Texians  stormed  the  city  of  San  Antonio, 
and  compelled  General  Coss  and  eleven  hundred 
Mexicans  to  surrender — in  1836,  when  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty  Texians  in  Alamo,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Travis,  held  out  thirteen  days 
against  Santa  Anna  at  the  head  of  eight  thousand 
opposing  forces,  and  every  Texian  falling  after  kill- 
ing five  times  their  number — in  the  same  year,  when 
Colonel  Fannin  and  four  hundred  men,  at  the  bat- 
tle of  Coletta,  in  a  three  hours'  engagement,  beat  off 
thirteen  hundred  of  the  enemy  under  General  Urea, 
though  the  next  day  he  was  deceived  into  a  surren- 
der— in  the  same  year,  when  seven  hundred  Tex- 
ians, of  their  own  spontaneous  will,  charged  and 
routed  fifteen  hundred  of  the  enemy,  under  General 
Santa  Anna,  at  San  Jacinto,  killing  and  capturing 
the  whole — in  the  same  year,  when  Deaf  Smith, 
with  twenty  Texians,  charged  and  routed  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  of  the  enemy — in  1839,  when  one 
hundred  and  four  Texians,  under  Colonel  Jordan, 
beat  one  thousand  of  the  Mexicans  at  Saltillo,  and 
made  good  their  retreat  into  Texas,  in  the  face  of 
such  odds,  with  the  loss  of  only  four  men — in  1842, 
when  Colonel  Caldwell,  with  two  hundred  and  ten 
Texians,  repulsed  General  Woll  and  thirteen  hun- 
dred of  the  enemy  at  Arroya  Salado — in  the  same 
year,  when  two   hundred   and   sixty-one  Texians 

3  D 


394  REFLECTIONS. 

drove  ten  times  their  number  into  Mier,  fought 
them  for  nineteen  hours,  killing  and  wounding 
three  times  their  number,  though  they  were  deceiv- 
ed into  a  surrender,  and  cheated  out  of  their  victo- 
ry— in  1843,  when  two  hundred  unarmed  Texian 
prisoners  at  Salado  charged  twice  their  number  of 
armed  guards,  beat  and  dispersed  them — in  the  same 
year,  when  Commodore  Moore,  off  Campeachy,  si- 
lenced ten  times  his  naval  force,  and  compelled  them 
to  seek  shelter — in  fine,  let  us  go  back  to  Mina's 
expedition  in  Mexico,  and  follow  him  through  his 
bloody  campaign,  and  nowhere  will  we  find  that 
the  Mexicans  have  stood  the  charge  of  the  North 
Americans  and  the  descendants  of  the  English,  and 
good  reasons  teach  that  they  must  be  regenerated 
before  they  ever  will.  A  small  knowledge  of  the 
Mexican's  raising,  his  habits  of  life,  and  his  mode  of 
enlisting,  will  prove  this  assertion. 

The  Mexican  army  is  composed  of  the  veriest 
dregs  of  their  population,  having  been  raised  in 
the  most  abject  degradation  and  slavery,  without 
ever  being  permitted  the  use  of  fire-arms :  they  are 
forcibly  taken  from  the  criminals  prisons,  the  un- 
protected Peons,  and  the  houseless  leper os.  These 
wretched  creatures  are  tied  together  like  brutes, 
without  their  will,  and  without  the  power  of  re- 
monstrance, when  they  are  forced  into  quartels, 
where  for  many  months  they  are  drilled  like  ma- 
chines, then  placed  in  uniform,  and  given  a  bright 
musket,  which  his  greatest  punishment  is  to  be  made 


REFLECTIONS.  395 

to  fire.  In  the  Mexican  army  we  see  no  target- 
firing,  and  upon  inspection  days  the  inside  of  the 
gun  is  not  looked  to,  when  it  is  the  especial  duty  of 
the  soldier  to  keep  the  outside  bright.  Their  armyx 
with  a  gay,  peacock  uniform  and  bright  arms,  under 
the  exciting  notes  of  the  bugle,  has,  to  an  inexpe 
rienced  eye,  a  formidable  appearance.  The  soldier 
goes  through  the  "  manner  with  a  stiff,  uniform,  ma- 
chine-like motion,  while  the  company  and  regiment- 
al drill  is  taught  as  horses  are  taught  to  perform 
tricks  which  they  cannot  know  the  meaning  of. 
Such  soldiers,  thus  recruited,  are  called  volunteers, 
and  the  army  the  "  defenders  of  liberty  /" 

With  such  mockery  of  truth,  such  destitution  of 
principle,  is  it  to  be  expected  that  such  an  army  can 
cope  with  freemen,  who  in  the  nursery  are  taught 
that  they  have  no  superiors  and  but  few  equals — 
who  go  forth  from  their  mother's  watchfulness  with 
the  rifle  in  their  hands,  and  by  the  time  they  are  en- 
titled to  breeches,  emulate  their  bold  sires  both  at 
the  target  and  in  horsemanship  1  While  the  chief 
accomplishment  of  the  Mexican  is  in  throwing  a 
rope  over  a  pig's  head  or  a  mule's  foot,  the  Texian 
fires  at  the  target  with  the  most  scientific  estimate 
of  the  strength  of  his  powder,  the  weight  of  his  shot, 
and  the  placing  of  his  sights.  His  first  lesson  from 
his  father  is,  "Never  to  touch  his  double  trigger  un- 
til his  double  sights  are  right;"  and  from  this  im- 
portant lesson  no  circumstance  can  drive  him.  He 
holds  in   contempt  the  empty  show  and  gewgaw 


396  REFLECTIONS. 

pomp  of  the  camp,  and  looks  upon  it  as  the  shadow 
rather  than  the  substance  of  power.  It  is  this  feel- 
ing which  has  been  called  by  foreigners  the  ultra 
democracy  of  the  nation:  it  is  a  conscious  superior- 
ity in  themselves  which  gives  confidence  to  the  ac- 
tion. 

If  a  Mexican  commits  theft  or  other  crime,  he  is 
sent  to  prison  therefor,  where  he  takes  the  highest 
degrees  in  human  vices,  which,  it  would  seem,  in 
the  estimation  of  that  government,  perfects  him  for 
the  soldier,  and  from  whence  he  is  turned  into  the 
army,  while  one  upon  the  suspicion  of  theft  in  our 
army  would  find  his  head  shaved  and  himself  drum- 
med out  of  the  ranks,  to  the  music  of  the  Rogues 
March.  "An  honourable  discharge"  from  our  army 
is  the  highest  boast  of  its  owner;  he  prizes  it  as  the 
richest  jewel  he  can  leave  to  his  posterity ;  and  while 
with  pride  his  heart  swells  over  it  as  a  matter  of 
patriotism,  it  is  the  foundation  of  his  land-title.  Not 
so  in  Mexico  ;  neither  land  nor  patriotism  enters 
into  the  account ;  honourable  discharges  are  not 
known;  and  while  a  bad  criminal  is  kept  in  the 
service  as  a  punishment,  a  good  soldier  is  too  valu- 
able to  be  spared  the  service.  In  their  ranks,  good 
and  bad  alike  wear  out  a  premature  existence  upon 
a  scanty  pittance,  which  poorly  serves  him  from  day 
to  day ;  and  without  the  expectation  of  future  re- 
ward, he  seeks  every  opportunity  of  deserting  from 
this  unthankful  service. 

Nowhere,  upon  my  long  march  through  Mexico, 


REFLECTIONS.  397 

except  in  the  valley  of  the  Rio  Grande,  was  the 
least  sign  of  improvement,  either  public  or  private, 
either  in  building  or  agriculture.  The  withering 
hand  of  decay  appears  to  be  fastened  upon  the  land ; 
everything  seems  to  be  in  its  downward  tendency,  as 
fast  as  time  and  neglect  will  carry  it.  The  subject, 
so  long  debased,  is  sinking  lower  and  faster,  if  possi- 
ble. Their  ages  of  vice  and  misery  have  entailed 
upon  them  diseases,  which  follow  from  generation  to 
generation,  sickening  to  contemplate,  and  disgusting 
to  behold.  Lunacy,  blindness,  deformity,  and  many 
libidinous  diseases  are  the  hereditary  entailments  of 
the  multitude,  and  carry  off  thousands  yearly  when 
in  the  prime  age  of  manhood. 

At  San  Luis  Potosi  I  was  quartered  in  a  hospital, 
and  in  the  room  adjoining  that  in  which  I  was 
confined  there  were  forty  out  of  forty-three  of  its  in- 
mates inflicted  with  lewd  diseases,  most  of  whom 
were  considered  to  be  incurable.  During  my  short 
stay  at  this  place,  several  died  the  most  horrible 
deaths.  This,  I  was  informed  by  an  intelligent  Mex- 
ican officer,  was  a  fair  proportion  of  the  diseases  of 
the  country,  and  that  it  was  hereditary  in  families. 
When,  with  astonishment,  I  asked  him  if  the  disease 
extended  to  the  better  classes  of  society,  he  replied 
in  the  affirmative,  but  said  "  that  people,  of  late, 
were  getting  more  particular,  and  now  its  non-ex- 
istence entered  into  the  marriage  contract:  that  it 
was  one  of  the  first  inquiries  of  parents  before  they 
bestowed  the  hand  of  a  daughter,  and  vice  versa  with 


398  REFLECTIONS. 

the  parents  of  the  son."  What  a  monstrous  state  of 
society  !  and  how  shocking  it  must  appear  to  the 
public  ear  of  the  United  States !  that  community 
which  looks  with  such  horror  at  the  possible  exist- 
ence of  it,  even  in  the  very  small  proportion  of  the 
lowest  dregs  of  a  city  population. 

I  saw  families,  a  large  proportion  of  whom  were 
blind,  and  one,  in  particular,  wretchedly  deformed, 
without  any  other  use  of  their  legs  than  to  crawl 
upon  their  all  fours,  with  a  kind  of  jumping  gait, 
much  resembling  the  motion  of  the  mud  turtle. 
These  miserable  creatures,  who  appeared  as  desti- 
tute of  reason  as  of  physical  power,  were  huddled 
together  in  the  greatest  destitution,  and  seemed  to 
move  and  propagate  by  instinct.  There  can  be 
nothing  more  certain  than  that  these  diseases  and 
infirmities  are  propagated.  One  instance  came  under 
my  observation  strikingly  illustrative  of  this  fact :  it 
was  in  the  person  of  one  of  the  camp  followers,  a 
most  unwise  proportion  of  whom  pursue  the  Mexican 
camp.  He  was  a  man  apparently  of  about  forty-five 
years  of  age,  with  a  full-sized,  well-proportioned  head 
and  body,  but  whose  legs,  from  his  hip  joints  to  his 
feet,  did  not  exceed  one  foot  in  length,  and  his  arms 
were  in  proportion  to  the  length  of  his  legs,  thus 
giving  him  the  height  of  a  boy  of  seven  years  of 
age.  This  little  man  was  of  the  most  enduring  con- 
stitution, and  would  toddle  after  our  regiment  in  a 
brisk  run  thirty  miles  per  day.  When  the  regiment 
would  halt  for  the  night,  the  little  fellow  would  dance 


REFLECTIONS.  399 

either  for  clacos  or  aguardiente,  of  both  of  which  he 
was  very  fond.  He  told  us  that  he  had  a  very  tall 
wife  and  eight  children  ;  that  four  of  them  took  after 
their  mother  and  had  long  legs,  and  four  of  them  af- 
ter himself  and  had  short  ones.  Many  other  instan- 
ces of  lusus  naturce  came  under  my  observation,  and 
I  was  informed  that  an  alarming  proportion  of  the 
population  were  afflicted  with  these  wretched  en- 
tailments. 

Tn  the  Valley  of  the  Rio  Grande  only  did  we  see 
anything  resembling  improvement.  Here  the  people 
are  infinitely  superior  in  condition  and  intelligence 
to  those  more  south:  here  were  new  fields  being 
opened,  and  some  cotton  plantations  under  way, 
with  the  border  towns  from  Matamoras  up  to  Lare- 
do, which,  during  this  war,  have  doubled,  and  some 
quadrupled  their  population.  What  a  volume  this 
single  fact  speaks !  that  upon  the  immediate  border 
between  the  two  belligerants  is  the  only  improve- 
ment in  the  one  claiming  to  be  "mighty  and  mag- 
nanimous." Can  there  be  a  stronger  argument  of 
the  irrevocably  lost  condition  of  Mexico,  than  that 
the  only  improvement  in  her  mighty  empire  is  in  that 
immediate  district  which  has  borne  the  burden  of  the 
contest  1  And  why  1  Because  that  district  is  con~ 
tiguous  to  a  race  of  improvement — that,  notwith- 
standing all  the  burdens  and  calamities  of  an  eight- 
years'  war,  their  intercourse  with  Texians,  even  in 
hostility,  has  opened  their  eyes  to  the  improvement 
of  their  neighbours.     If,  then,  this  often  ravaged  bor- 


400  REFLECTIONS. 

der  is  the  only  portion  of  all  Mexico  in  a  state  of 
improvement,  what  would  be  not  only  its  condition, 
but  that  of  the  whole  country,  under  the  benign  in- 
fluence of  peace  and  good  government  ? 

What  we  have  already  said  of  the  recruiting  of  a 
Mexican  army,  and  the  character  of  that  army  when 
recruited,  is  the  least  difficult  part  of  their  war  estab- 
lishment. This  army,  after  a  long  and  tedious  drill- 
ing, is  turned  into  a  flaming  automaton,  without  the 
thought  necessary  to  meet  a  sudden  emergency,  and 
hence  always  subject  to  surprise  and  panic  ;  but, 
machine-like  as  it  is,  it  requires  to  be  supported,  and, 
from  its  size  and  duties,  a  support  larger  than  the 
resources  of  the  government.  Even  without  foreign 
war,  the  whole  immense  extent  of  the  Mexican 
territory  has  to  be  watched,  to  do  which  a  large 
army  establishment  is  necessary.  The  presence  of 
bayonets  alone  can  keep  down  a  people  goaded  to 
desperation  with  onerous  exactions  under  unwise 
laws.  Withdraw  this  threatening  power,  and  the 
people  are  at  once  in  arms :  the  presence  of  the  bay- 
onet is  essential  to  the  existence  of  the  despotism, 
and  their  support  is  the  consumption  of  the  people's 
substance.  If,  then,  a  necessary  peace  establishment 
at  home  requires  more  than  the  income  of  the  gov- 
ernment, how  is  it  possible  to  increase  it  so  as  to 
wage  a  successful  foreign  war?  Let  her  withdraw 
the  peace  establishment  to  prosecute  a  foreign  war, 
an  enemy  at  once  rises  up  at  home  which  subverts 
the  existing  government.     Her  army  has  to  be  fed, 


REFLECTIONS.  401 

clothed,  and  armed  alone  from  the  public  chest,  and 
without  such  support  from  day  to  day,  it  must  cer- 
tainly dissolve.  They  have  no  provident  commissa- 
riat, which  looks  ahead  to  emergencies,  and  the 
soldier's  support  is  consequently  a  daily  drain  upon 
the  army  chest.  The  government,  without  manu- 
factories, has  to  seek  her  arms  from  abroad,  and  the 
refuse  of  other  nations,  both  from  their  cheapness 
and  the  ignorance  of  the  Mexicans  in  the  daily  im- 
provements of  the  age,  are  bought  up.  How  is  it 
with  Texas  1 

Here  is  a  whole  nation  of  soldiers,  from  the  twelve- 
year-old  boy  to  the  grayheaded  grandfather,  not 
shut  up  in  walled  quartels,  as  ready  instruments  to 
enforce  the  exactions  of  tyranny,  but  each  soldier 
occupying  his  own  armed  castle  with  his  true  and 
faithful  rifle  ever  in  readiness,  and  his  water-proof 
shot-pouch  always  filled  ;  here,  in  one  hour's  no- 
tice, these  guardians  of  liberty  can  be  in  their  sad- 
dles, in  readiness  to  meet  wherever  danger  threatens, 
and  prepared  to  stay  from  home  according  to  the 
emergency ;  here  no  man  is  too  poor  to  buy  one 
dollar's  worth  of  powder  and  lead,  which  will  serve 
his  rifle  through  a  bloody  campaign;  and  should 
there  be  such  a  one,  his  more  able  neighbour  cheer- 
fully supplies  him ;  here  is  a  surplus  of  corn  and 
beef  throughout  the  land  always  in  readiness  for 
those  in  the  service  of  the  country  ;  here  is  a  skill 
in  the  use  of  arms  unknown  in  any  other  portion  of 
the  world,  and  an  intrepidity  of  daring  which  fre- 

3E 


402  REFLECTIONS. 

quent  dangers  have  made  commonplace  :  in  fine, 
here  is  a  moral  principle  controlling  the  action 
which  no  circumstance  can  subvert.  Thus  it  is  that 
we  see  Texas,  with  an  army  of  twenty  thousand 
citizen  soldiers  quartered  throughout  the  country, 
always  in  readiness  to  meet  a  foreign  foe,  and  with- 
out the  cost  of  one  dollar  to  the  government. 

When  the  called  session  of  the  Texian  Congress  of 
1842  urged  upon  the  executive  to  prosecute  the  war, 
he,  in  his  message  to  the  Congress,  makes  the  fre- 
quent assertion  that  the  nation  had  no  means  of  do- 
ing so.  Not  only  was  that  message  published  to  the 
enemy,  but  the  same  executive  again  reiterates  the 
assertion,  time  after  time,  in  the  many  speeches  which 
his  extraordinary  conduct  made  it  necessary  for  him 
to  make  to  justify  himself,  without  ever  once  advert- 
ing to  the  fact  that,  of  the  many  thousand  volunteers 
who  took  the  field  in  that  year,  not  one  required  ei- 
ther pay  or  rations  of  the  government.  The  whole 
campaign  of  that  year  has  plainly  demonstrated  the 
fact,  that  it  was  unnecessary  to  furnish  either  pay  or 
rations.  The  ample  pay  which  the  soldier  looked 
to  was  the  consummation  of  that  liberty  for  which 
he  at  first  struck ;  nothing  more  did  he  desire,  no- 
thing less  would  he  have.  His  sustenance  was  to  be 
found  upon  every  prairie,  the  free  use  of  which  was 
his  welcome  privilege.  Thus  we  find  Texas  a  na- 
tion of  soldiers,  brave  in  war  and  skilled  in  arms, 
with  all  the  munitions  of  a  campaign  in  readiness, 
and  with  a  moral  purpose  which  despotism  can  nei- 
ther control  nor  check. 


REFLECTIONS.  403 

When  the  timid  and  weak-headed  of  our  own, 
and  the  speculative  and  uninformed  of  other  coun- 
tries, have  expressed  doubts  as  to  the  ability  of  Texas 
to  maintain  herself  against  Mexico,  these  doubts  were 
the  offspring  of  ignorance  and  fear.  A  people  like 
the  bulk  of  the  Texas  population,  born  in  and  reared 
under  the  principles  of  free  representative  government, 
will  not  even  entertain  a  question  of  change.  That 
proposition  which  purposes  to  send  them  back  to 
despotism  can  get  no  hold  upon  the  popular  thought, 
and  the  occasional  recreant  who  would  harbour  it  in 
his  own  bosom  dare  not  utter  it.  Effeminacy,  licen- 
tiousness, and  corruption,  after  the  slow  and  gradual 
inroads  of  ages,  may  undermine  a  nation's  political 
morals,  as  will  indulgence  an  individual's.  What 
months  and  years  may  do  to  the  individual,  requires 
ages  and  centuries  to  effect  with  the  nation.  Thus 
it  has  been  with  those  representative  governments 
which  have  preceded  us :  the  constituents  had  first 
to  be  corrupted  one  by  one,  and  when  all  the  mem- 
bers were  affected,  then  the  body  sunk.  Such  may 
ultimately  be  the  destiny  of  Texas;  but,  with  the 
lights  of  the  world  before  her,  there  can  be  no  just 
fear  that  her  course  of  freedom  will  be  short  of  any 
nation  which  has  gone  before. 

Can  a  nation  born  and  raised  in  such  principles 
long  practise  a  neighbourhood  comity  with  one  whose 
principles  are  in  such  diametrical  opposition  1 

History  has  given  a  negative  answer  to  this  ques- 
tion.  It  was  not  so  in  the  days  of  the  Grecian  Re- 


404  REFLECTIONS. 

publics  or  the  Commonwealth  of  Rome,  and  the 
short  life  of  representative  government  in  France 
has  fully  demonstrated  its  entire  impracticability. 
The  lamb  might  as  well  be  caged  with  the  hungry 
wolf  in  the  hope  of  living  in  friendship.  Such  na- 
tions, to  keep  in  peace,  must  either  be  separated  by 
long  distance  or  by  some  difficult  natural  boundary, 
the  surmounting  of  which  will  be  equivalent  there- 
to. They  cannot  commingle  in  the  same  trades, 
and  practise  rights  common  to  both  in  quiet.  What 
may  be  the  policy  of  the  one  may  prove  the  bane 
of  the  other,  and  we  could  with  the  same  hope  make 
virtue  and  vice  assimilate :  thus,  for  instance,  the 
subjects  of  the  present  slavish  despotism  of  Mexico 
holding,  in  common  with  the  citizens  of  Texas,  the 
free  navigation  of  the  Rio  Grande,  with  the  high 
tariff  contraband  laws,  and  government  monopolies 
on  the  one  side,  and  the  low  tariff  and  free  trade 
principles  on  the  other.  The  interference  of  the 
former  with  the  rights  of  negro  property  of  the  lat- 
ter, and  many  other  opposite  interests,  would  keep 
up  between  the  two  perpetual  excitement,  which 
would  result  in  perpetual  war. 

In  Mexico,  for  instance,  none  but  a  licensed  few, 
who  pay  high  for  the  privilege,  can  raise  tobacco, 
and  that,  when  raised,  is  to  be  sold  to  the  govern- 
ment at  a  price  far  below  its  value.  In  Mexico, 
none  but  the  government  dare  make  a  segar,  and  no 
man,  woman,  or  child  dare  smoke  one  except  it 
has  the  government  stamp  upon  it,  while  every  man, 


REFLECTIONS.  405 

woman,  and  child  in  the  nation  smokes.  The  val- 
ley of  the  San  Antonio  River  in  Texas  is  capable 
of  making  more  tobacco  at  a  cheap  rate  than  the 
wants  of  all  the  northern  states  of  Mexico,  and  it  is 
preposterous  to  say  that  this  would  not  be  done,  and 
carried  across  the  border,  in  defiance  of  all  the  laws 
of  Mexico,  even  had  she  an  army  upon  that  border 
twenty  times  her  ability  to  maintain. 

So  it  is  with  the  articles  of  raw  cotton  and  spun 
yarns.  Under  the  unwise  management  of  Mexico, 
her  manufactories  are  languishing,  with  the  latter  at 
sixty-two  to  seventy-five  cents  per  pound,  while  the 
cotton  can  be  grown,  spun,  and  transported  from 
Texas  into  Mexico  profitably  at  less  than  half  that 
price.  What  possible  circumstance  can  prevent 
this  from  being  done,  when  the  soil  of  Texas  pro- 
duces double  the  quantity  of  the  raw  article  per 
acre  which  is  reared  in  the  United  States — when, 
from  the  larger  size  of  the  Texas  cotton-bolls,  fifty 
per  cent,  more  can  be  saved  per  day — when  the 
length  of  the  picking  season  is  longer  and  better — 
when  provisions  are  cheaper  than  in  any  other  por- 
tion of  the  world,  and  where  a  superabundant  wa- 
ter-power costs  nothing  ? 

Two  nations  so  contiguous,  so  opposite  in  their 
policy,  and  every  way  so  unlike  each  other,  can 
never  live  in  friendship  with  a  border  which  invites 
both  to  its  advantages.  The  Rio  Grande,  from  its 
head  to  its  source,  from  the  forty-second  to  the 
twenty-fifth  degree  of  north  latitude,  is  capable  of 


406  ANNEXATION. 

maintaining  many  millions  of  population,  with  a  va- 
riety of  product  which  no  river  upon  the  north  con- 
tinent can  boast.  This  river,  once  settled  with  the 
enterprise  and  intelligence  of  the  English  race,  will 
yearly  send  forth  an  agricultural  export  which  it 
will  require  hundreds  of  steamers  to  transport  to  its 
delta,  while  its  hides,  wool,  and  metals  may  be  in- 
creased to  an  estimate  which  would  now  appear 
chimerical. 

If  annexation  of  Texas  to  the  United  States  of 
the  North  succeeds,  this  boundary  can  exist  but  for 
a  short  period ;  and  though  there  seems  to  me  to  be 
a  destiny  in  the  womb  of  time  which  marks  her 
southern  boundary  at  the  extremity  of  the  north 
continent,  where  the  two  great  oceans  of  the  world 
will  unite  under  a  genial  sun  and  a  smooth  naviga- 
tion, yet  her  more  immediate  southern  boundary 
must  extend  to  the  Sierra  Madre,  that  great  Chi- 
nese wall  which  separates  the  people  of  the  Rio 
Grande  from  those  of  the  more  southern  table-lands. 
Can  this  be  considered  a  greedy  desire  upon  the  part 
of  the  mighty  northern  nation,  when  her  facilities  of 
communication  with  those  people  from  her  capital 
in  twelve  days  are  superior  to  their  present  means 
of  communication  with  the  capital  of  Mexico  in 
thirty  ?  We  say  not.  This  age  has  merged  dis- 
tance in  time,  and  the  people  of  the  Rio  Grande  at 
present  are  as  near  neighbours  to  the  capital  of  the 
United  States  as  Boston  was  to  Philadelphia  at  the 
promulgation  of  President  Washington's  inaugural 
message  to  the  first  Congress. 


ANNEXATION.  407 

Should  annexation  not  take  place,  this  will  be 
done,  and  sooner  done  by  Texas.  Both  the  gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States  and  Texas  are  found- 
ed upon  the  same  political  code.  The  same  politi- 
cal sentiment  enters  into  each.  They  have  the  same 
common  origin — the  same  language,  laws,  and  reli- 
gion— the  same  pursuits  and  interests ;  and  though 
they  may  remain  independent  of  each  other  as  to 
government,  they  are  identified  in  weal  and  wo — 
they  will  flourish  side  by  side  pari  passu,  and  the 
blight  which  affects  the  one  will  surely  reach  the 
other.  The  unity  of  the  Texian  government,  her 
immediate  contiguity  to  Mexico,  and  her  multiplied 
causes  of  quarrel  therefrom,  will  cause  her  arms  to 
extend  south  and  west  sooner  than  would  those  of 
the  United  States.  In  the  later  government  of  such 
a  confederacy  of  republics  there  are  many  heads 
to  consult  and  many  interests  to  accommodate. 
These  numerous  sectional  interests,  whether  real  or 
fancied,  must  be  accommodated,  and  by  an  action 
necessarily  slower  than  that  of  Texas. 

As  I  have  said  before,  it  was  not  my  purpose  to 
discuss,  at  present,  the  question  of  annexation.  That 
has  been  often  and  ably  done,  and  much  has  been 
said  on  both  sides  ;  but  as  a  Texian,  feeling  a  prop- 
er.degree  of  pride  in  her  nationality,  and  an  absorb- 
ing interest  in  her  welfare,  whatever  may  be  her 
destiny,  duty  requires  me  to  deny  a  position  which 
seems  to  have  grown  up  with  the  argument,  to  wit, 
that  most  or  all  the  advantages  of  union  would  re- 
sult to  Texas. 


408  ANNEXATION. 

If  Texas  has  been  the  applicant  for  this  political 
copartnership,  she  has  not  been  insensible  to  the 
fact  that  she  would  enter  the  firm  as  a  junior  part- 
ner, bringing  with  her  into  the  concern  more  than 
her  pro  rata  of  capital;  she  has  not  been  insensible 
to  the  fact  that  she  voluntarily  abandons  her  own 
freedom  to  take  a  junior  position  in  that  mighty  na- 
tional confederation  which  will  give  her  but  a  feeble 
voice  in  the  general  direction  of  affairs;  she  has  not 
been  blind  to  the  fact  that,  by  entering  into  the 
union,  she  makes  herself  a  party  to  the  many  quar- 
rels of  conflicting  interest  which  perpetually  excites 
that  great  national  family;  that  by  this  step  she  vol- 
untarily leaps  into  the  questions  of  bank  or  no  bank; 
of  free  trade,  high  tariff,  and  protection ;  of  abolition 
and  disunion ;  she  is  fully  aware  that  she  gives  to 
the  Northern  States  all  the  benefits  of  her  carrying 
trade,  to  the  injury  of  her  own  citizens,  and  taxes 
herself  with  northern  manufactures  at  least  thirty 
per  cent,  higher  than  she  could  procure  like  articles 
from  other  nations ;  she  is  not  insensible  to  the  fact 
that  after  this  current  year  a  ten  per  cent,  ad  valorem 
tariff,  without  direct  taxation,  will  be  ample  for  the 
support  of  her  government,  when,  by  coming  into 
the  Union,  she  voluntarily  taxes  herself  four  times 
that  amount;  she  is  not  insensible  to  the  fact  that 
she  offers  to  the  confederacy  four  hundred  miles  of 
seacoast,  with  all  the  advantages  of  the  rich  valley 
of  the  Rio  Grande,  including  sixteen  degrees  of 
latitude,  from  its  source  to  its  mouth,  with  more 


ANNEXATION.  409 

than  one  hundred  millions  of  acres  of  public  do- 
main. And  for  what  are  these  mighty  surrenders 
made?  Does  Texas  receive  a  quid  pro  quo  in  hav- 
ing her  coffers  filled  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on 
what  ought  to  be  her  brilliant  destiny  even  as  one 
of  the  states  \  No  !  She  receives  just  enough  of 
the  proceeds  of  her  immense  domain  to  pay  a  debt, 
not  a  tithe  of  its  value.  And  to  whom  is  this  debt 
paid  but  to  the  citizens  of  the  United  States,  most 
of  whom  have  bought  it  upon  speculation  1  Texas 
is  none  the  better  off  for  this,  save  in  the  protection 
of  that  national  faith,  which  she  prizes  as  an  honest 
nation  should.  If  this  debt  were  paid  to  her  own 
citizens,  it  would  be  that  much  towards  her  individ- 
ual state  wealth,  whereas  not  one  dollar  in  fifty  comes 
to  those  citizens.  It  goes  into  the  hands  of  foreign 
money-shavers  and  broker-gamblers,  who  care  no- 
thing beyond  for  her  prosperity,  because  such  people 
have  no  feelings  except  in  the  usury  of  coppers. 

Thus  it  is  that  Texas  would  denude  herself  by 
abolishing  her  Constitution — by  dismissing  her  for- 
eign ministers — by  cutting  short  her  acquaintance 
with  an  enlightened  world — by  surrendering  her 
separate  independence,  and  committing  national 
suicide — to  submit  to  a  high  protective  tariff,  and 
resort  to  the  grinding  operation  of  a  direct  tax  for 
the  support  of  her  state  government,  and  then  sink 
to  an  obscure  corner  in  the  constellation  of  states  for 
that  proud  feeling  which  a  majority  of  her  citizens 
claim  in  their  nativity.     The  United  States  can  not, 

3F 


410  ANNEXATION. 

must  not,  therefore,  view  her  as  the  only  beneficiary 
to  the  contract. 

This  feeling  of  nativity  must  be  strong  indeed 
which  would  voluntarily  make  these  mighty  surren- 
ders ;  and  to  him  who  cannot  feel  that  pride  of 
birth  which  most  of  the  people  of  Texas  feel,  these 
surrenders  must  appear  truly  astonishing.  It  is  an 
exalted  feeling  far  above  all  calculations  of  dollars 
and  cents  ;  and  truly  may  we  exclaim,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  a  distinguished  Roman,  "  Nescio  qua  natale 
solum  dukedine  cunctos  ducit,  et  immemores  non  sinit 
esse  sui"  If  the  sordid  interests  of  money  were  to 
enter  into  the  calculation,  it  would  appear  as  rea- 
sonable for  a  son  who  had  received  a  competent 
outfit  from  a  father,  and  taken  upon  him  all  the  du- 
ties and  pleasures  of  a  household,  to  seek  to  surren- 
der everything  back  to  that  father  when  he  had 
subsequently  married  a  termagant  stepmother. 

Since  the  establishment  of  Texian  independence, 
she  cannot  have  viewed,  but  with  regret  and  morti- 
fication, the  rapid  growth  of  principles  in  her  father- 
land, which  no  circumstances  under  annexation  will 
cause  her  ever  to  submit  to.  At  the  establishment 
of  Texian  independence,  a  fanatical  few  preached 
the  doctrine  of  universal  equality  between  the  white 
and  black  man,  between  the  master  and  the  slave. 
Then  this  few  received  the  countenance  of  but  few 
— then  the  many  abhorred  them  as  unprincipled 
disturbers  in  the  large  and  happy  household ;  no 
man  of  character  gave  countenance  to  the  unnatu- 


ANNEXATION.  411 

ral  associations  of  such  disgusting  doctrines.  How 
altered  now  the  case  1  The  contagion  of  fanati- 
cism, however  absurd,  is  like  the  contagion  of  phys- 
ical maladies,  which  communicate  by  contiguity. 
It  spread  first  to  the  ignorant,  because  they  were  in 
nearer  contact.  When  it  found  a  lodgment  in  the 
multitude,  it  met  a  response  in  the  demagogue  of 
higher  standing ;  then  found  apologists  in  the  Sen- 
ate ;  next,  advocates  among  the  most  talented,  and 
now  the  election  of  President  is  bending  to  its  in- 
fluence. When  the  son  proposes  to  give  everything 
back  to  the  father,  he  finds  that  father  wedded  to 
this  unnatural  mother,  with  whom  he  never  intends 
to  live  in  friendship.  Still,  the  son  insists  upon 
giving  back  all  his  wealth  to  be  divided  among  the 
offspring  of  his  mother,  the  young  half-bloods,  who 
are  taught  from  their  cradle  to  despise  him.  The 
boast  of  the  son  is  in  his  father's  name :  he  feels 
that  there  should  be  a  common  destiny  between 
them,  and  he  makes  the  wonderful  sacrifice  of  in- 
terest a  tribute  to  his  pride.  He  sees  his  wealth 
divided  among  the  large  family,  trusting  to  the  pre- 
carious whims  of  his  parent,  now  under  alien  influ- 
ence, not  only  for  justice,  but  for  bread.  Texas  is 
a  stronger  case :  from  her  father  she  went  forth  into 
the  world  penniless,  and  now  offers  her  hundred 
millions  of  acres  and  her  boundless  resources, 
which  is  the  fruit  of  her  own  industry,  sweat,  and 
blood. 

Are  these  all  the  advantages  which  would  result 


412  ANNEXATION. 

to  the  United  States  by  such  a  union?  No,  in- 
deed !  Many  others  might  be  enumerated ;  but,  in 
connexion  with  the  question  of  southern  boundary, 
I  will  only  notice  two,  which  seems  to  have  been 
overlooked  by  most  writers  upon  the  subject.  1st. 
The  possession  of  the  shortest  and  most  practicable 
route  to  the  settlements  and  commerce  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  on  the  Pacific  ;  and,  2dly.  A  boundary  in 
connexion  with  the  question  of  the  amelioration  and 
ultimate  destiny  of  slavery  in  the  United  States. 
First,  The  annexation  of  Texas  to  the  United 
States,  with  the  Rio  Grande  as  the  consequent  im- 
mediate southwestern  boundary,  would  necessarily, 
by  treaty  or  conquest,  extend  to  the  Sierra  Ma- 
dre,  and,  as  a  protection  against  the  northern  tribes 
of  Indians,  should  cross  to  the  Gulf  of  California 
about  the  28th  degree  of  north  latitude.  This 
would  be  the  shortest  and  most  expeditious  route 
from  the  United  States  as  well  to  her  Oregon  set- 
tlements as  to  her  other  numerous  interests  on  the 
Pacific. 

Taking  New-Orleans  as  the  most  convenient 
point  of  embarcation  from  the  United  States,  we  will 
find  that  sixteen  hundred  miles  of  steam  navigation 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Conchoes,  upon  the  Rio 
Grande,  can  be  made  in  about  the  same  time,  and, 
taking  the  year  round,  with  the  same  facilities,  that 
Cincinnati  can  upon  the  Ohio  ;  and  from  the  head 
of  steam  navigation  upon  the  Rio  Conchoes,  across 
the  Sierra  de  Carcay  to  steam  navigation  upon  the 


ANNEXATION.  413 

Rio  Hiagui,  a  distance  of  three  hundred  miles  by 
railroad,  the  port  of  Guaymas,  upon  the  Gulf  of  Cal- 
ifornia, could  be  reached  in  eight  or  nine  days ;  sa- 
ving a  distance  of  four  thousand  miles,  and  twenty 
additional  days  steaming,  via  the  Panama  Canal,  pro- 
vided that  was  completed  ;  and  saving  a  distance  of 
twenty-four  thousand  miles,  via  Cape  Horn,  and  the 
average  economy  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  days 
sail,  steaming  such  a  distance  being  too  expensive. 
It  would  save  a  four  months'  travel  the  present  route 
across  the  country  from  steam  navigation  of  the  Mis- 
souri waters  to  Oregon. 

This  short  and  expeditious  route  to  the  growing, 
and  soon  to  be  the  important  settlement  of  Oregon, 
and,  at  present,  many  other  interests  in  the  Pacific 
in  the  event  of  the  acquisition  of  this  country  by  the 
United  States,  would  be  the  smallest  reasons  for  the 
accomplishment  of  this  route. 

The  most  desirable  portion  of  this  continent  lies 
between  the  28th  and  42d  degrees  of  north  latitude 
upon  the  Pacific.  It  presents  more  than  a  thousand 
miles  of  seacoast,  with  the  important  ports  of  Guay- 
mas,  San  Diego,  San  Gabriel,  Monterey,  San  Fran- 
cisco, and  many  others,  with  a  soil  and  climate  of 
unsurpassed  capability  for  grazing  and  agriculture, 
and  a  mineral  wealth  supposed  to  be  equal,  if  not  su- 
perior, to  any  in  the  world.  This  vast  country  of 
more  than  one  million  of  square  miles,  lying  due 
west  of  the  settled  portion  of  the  United  States,  be- 
tween the  frozen  regions  of  the  north  and  the  verti- 


414  ANNEXATION. 

cal  sun  of  the  south,  between  the  gentle  influences 
of  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  the  great  backbone  of  the 
continent,  capable  of  giving  wealth  and  happiness  to 
a  hundred  millions  of  souls,  is  now  in  possession  of 
roaming  tribes  of  unhoused  Indians,  and  a  few  set- 
tlements of  less  than  two  hundred  thousand  Mexi- 
can subjects.* 

If  Oregon  is  important  to  the  United  States,  this 
country  is  a  thousand  times  more  so.  The  extreme 
northern  lines  of  the  states  of  Pennsylvania,  Con- 
necticut, and  Rhode  Island  only  reach  to  the  42 d 
degree  of  north  latitude :  that  latitude  cuts  in  two 
the  states  of  Massachusetts  and  New- York,  and 
Lake  Erie  and  Michigan,  while  the  28th  degree  is 
north  of  the  United  States  settlements  in  Florida, 
and  nearly  three  degrees  north  of  Texas,  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Rio  Grande.  While  it  is  due  to  the 
United  States  that  she  should  not  permit  this  impor- 
tant country  to  fall  into  European  hands,  it  is  equal- 
ly due  to  her  that  she  should  possess  it  by  any  and 
every  means  necessary  thereto. 

Let  the  United  States  apply,  if  necessary,  the  usu- 
fruct doctrine  of  her  possession  of  this  country,  which 
Old  England  and  Old  Spain  practised  towards  the 
aborigines  upon  the  discovery  of  this  continent — 
a  doctrine  of  common  sense  and  sound  reason — of 


*  It  will  be  perceived  that  I  have  spoken  in  round  numbers  of  the  pop- 
ulation of  this  country.  Both  Forbes  and  Mayer  make  the  population 
much  less,  but  their  remarks  are  applicable  to  Upper  California,  while 
mine  extend  to  the  28th  degree  of  north  latitude. 


ANNEXATION.  415 

human  necessity  and  justice.  If  the  Author  of 
the  universe  intended  the  earth  for  the  support  of 
the  few,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  greater  number,  the 
reverse  of  this  doctrine  is  true,  and  then  it  is  right 
and  proper  that  a  very  few  should  hold  this  country, 
of  which  they  can  make  no  adequate  use,  to  the  ex- 
clusion of  many  millions  in  other  portions  of  the 
earth,  who  may  be  dying  for  the  want  of  space  to 
live  in.  When  Spain  claimed  title  and  possession 
to  this  vast  tract  of  country  under  this  doctrine,  that 
the  aborigines  had  no  title  in  the  soil,  but  only  a 
temporary  right  to  the  use  and  occupancy  thereof, 
such  only  as  the  buffalo  enjoys,  she  was  justified  in 
such  possession  only  by  applying  it  to  a  better  use. 
Three  hundred  years  have  passed,  and  neither  her- 
self nor  those  claiming  under  her  have  applied  it  to 
that  better  use,  and  she  holds  it  without  such  ability 
so  to  apply  it,  to  the  exclusion  of  others  who  have, 
and  whose  necessities  require  it.  England,  France, 
or  any  other  nation,  whose  population  is  greater  than 
her  means  of  subsistence,  has  a  right,  derived  direct- 
ly from  the  Maker  of  the  earth,  to  occupy  it  with 
her  redundant  people  ;  and  it  alone  is  a  question  of 
policy  or  power  whether  its  present  claimants  or  near- 
est neighbour  will  permit  it.  This  era,  so  marked 
in  the  improvements  of  agriculture,  machinery,  and 
navigation — in  the  knowledge  of  geography,  and  the 
increased  necessity  of  the  case,  will  not  allow  a  per- 
version of  the  use  of  this  country.  For  many  wise 
reasons,  the  United  States  should  extend  her  settle- 


416  ANNEXATION. 

merits  over  it ;  but  should  she,  by  a  different  policy, 
fail  to  do  so,  the  all-seeing  eye  of  Great  Britain  will 
not  let  slip  such  a  golden  opportunity  in  possessing 
herself  of  this  desirable  middle  ground  between  home 
and  her  vast  Eastern  possessions.  Besides,  if  the 
Oregon  settlement  is  important  to  the  United  States, 
without  a  harbour  sufficient  for  the  entrance  of  her 
smallest  vessels  of  war,  the  port  of  San  Francisco,  or 
some  other  port  in  the  south,  is  absolutely  necessary 
for  her. 

It  may,  however,  well  be  questioned  whether  ei- 
ther Spain  or  the  present  government  of  Mexico  has 
ever  had  any  other  than  a  nominal  possession  of 
this  vast  region ;  for  only  here  and  there,  in  a  very 
few  isolated  spots,  has  she  had  a  few  people  in  real 
possession,  and  those  few  shut  in  by  fortifications  as 
protection  against  the  aboriginal  occupants.  If, 
therefore,  she  has  no  power  of  absolutely  possessing 
herself  of  this  country,  her  declaration  of  ownership 
to  it  was  arbitrary,  and  the  act  not  justified  by  her 
means ;  and  with  the  same  propriety  she  might  have 
claimed,  to  illimitable  extent,  that  which  she  neither 
had  the  use  of  nor  power  of  using,  depriving  millions 
of  the  earth's  population  of  support  and  the  proper 
uses  thereof. 

While  I  hold  that  it  is  both  just  and  proper  that 
any  nation  with  an  overgrown  population  may  set- 
tle these  vast  wastes  with  her  redundant  people,  I 
repeat  again  that  it  would  be  short-sighted  policy  in 
the  United  States  to  permit  it.     That  nation,  with 


ANNEXATION.  417 

her  twenty  millions  of  people,  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  events,  in  fifty  years,  will  have  eighty  to  provide 
for,  and  a  large  country  will  be  necessary  for  so 
many  within  the  lifetime  of  numbers  now  busy  in  the 
politics  of  that  country.  With  such  an  acquisition, 
the  United  States  would  not  be  larger  than  Brazil 
with  her  six  millions  of  people,  and  about  one  third  of 
the  size  of  the  present  British  dominions.  With  such 
an  acquisition,  the  United  States  would  contain  but 
a  fraction  over  three  millions  of  square  miles,  and 
without  Texas  that  would  be  cut  nearly  in  twain  by 
a  narrow  slip  extending  to  the  42d  degree  of  north 
latitude,  which  is  the  parallel  of  Boston.  If  it  be 
wise  policy,  and  the  United  States  extends  her  do- 
minions to  the  28th  degree  upon  the  Pacific,  then 
Texas  becomes  absolutely  necessary  to  her.  Then 
the  Texas  wedge,  making  into  the  centre  of  her 
square  and  compact  surface,  will  appear  obviously 
wrong.  It  would  be  a  severance  of  her  entirety, 
which  few  would  be  willing  to  reconcile ;  and  with- 
out a  union  of  the  two  countries,  a  conflict  of  inter- 
est would  inevitably  grow  up  between  the  separate 
nations,  detrimental  certainly  to  one,  and  probably 
to  both.  This  conflict  would  beget  countervailing 
laws,  such  as  are  at  present  in  the  bud,  and  would 
produce  estrangement  to  the  advantage  of  European 
powers,  which  would  profit  by  the  quarrel. 

Secondly,  This  boundary,  viewed  with  reference 
to  the  amelioration  and  ultimate  destiny  of  the  ne- 
gro population  of  the  United  States. 

3G 


418  ABOLITION. 

Though  I  believe  that  so  good  a  political  institu- 
tion does  not  exist  in  any  nation  for  the  government 
of  its  poorer  or  more  dependant  population  as  sla- 
very in  its  general  character  in  the  south  and  south- 
western portion  of  the  United  States  and  Texas ; 
and  while  I  believe  that  it  is  the  reverse  of  either  a 
"  moral  or  political  evil,"  viewed  as  it  is  at  pres- 
ent, yet  the  day  may  come,  and  probably  in  the 
lifetime  of  that  generation  now  coming  into  the 
world,  when,  either  from  individual  interest  or  pub- 
lic policy,  the  white  and  black  man  can  no  longer 
occupy  the  same  soil.  Does  it  not,  then,  behoove 
the  politicians  of  this  day  and  time  to  cast  about  for 
the  solution  of  that  difficult  problem  before  which 
all  other  questions  of  public  policy  must  sink  into 
utter  insignificance  1  What  is  to  be  done  with  the 
black  1  is  that  difficult  problem. 

In  the  solution  of  this  question,  I  hold  it  to  be 
self-evident,  that  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  Uni- 
ted States  will  not  take  place  till  it  becomes  the  in- 
terest of  the  owner,  and  not  then  until  there  is  a 
separate  country  to  locate  them  upon. 

Both  those  who  advocated  the  re-colonization  of 
the  black  race  in  Africa,  and  the  fanatical  abolition- 
ist who  preached  the  doctrine  of  equality  in  its  broad 
sense,  were  far  ahead  of  the  question — the  coloni- 
zationist,  because  of  its  impracticability,  and  the 
abolitionist,  because  neither  public  justice  nor  public 
safety  would  permit  it.  The  first  commenced  the 
work  without  a  due  estimate  of  its  cost,  and  the  lat- 


ABOLITION.  419 

ter  without  regard  to  the  political  safety  and  moral 
operation  of  the  measure  upon  those  immediately 
concerned.  While  the  first  met  the  approbation  of 
many  leading  political  philanthropists  of  the  coun- 
try, all  the  means  which  their  most  sanguine  expec- 
tations could  hope  for  would  not  transport  to  their 
native  country  a  tithe  of  the  blacks'  increase ;  and 
from  fanatical  impulse,  the  latter  looked  to  the  suc- 
cessful precedent  of  the  Northern  States  as  their  strong 
argument,  without  ever  estimating  the  vast  dissimi- 
larity of  circumstances  between  the  North  and  the 
South. 

In  the  fifteen  free  states  and  territories  of  the  Amer- 
ican Union,  containing  a  population  of  9,557,055 
whites,  there  are  only  172,892  people  of  colour; 
that,  at  the  time  the  abolition  of  slavery  took  place 
in  these  states,  but  a  small  fraction  of  that  num- 
ber existed,  and  their  labour  had  become  compar- 
atively profitless.  How  altered  is  the  case  now  ! 
In  the  fifteen  slave  states  and  territories,  with  a  white 
population  of  4,632,053,  there  are  2,701,566  blacks, 
being  385,540  more  than  half  of  all  the  white  pop- 
ulation of  those  states.  This  was  the  population  of 
the  United  States  in  1840,  and  at  present  the  blacks 
of  those  states  are  more  than  three  millions.  Let 
us,  then,  strain  a  supposition  that  it  was  to  the  in- 
terest of  all  concerned  that  these  three  millions  of 
people  should  be  manumitted  and  turned  over  to  the 
Colonization  Society  to  be  sent  home  to  Africa :  it 
would  require  ten  thousand  of  the  largest  class  mer- 


420  ABOLITION. 

chant  ships,  supposing  each  to  transport  300  souls, 
and  $150,000,000,  allowing  the  moderate  expense 
of  fifty  dollars  each  to  collect  them  together  and 
transport  them  across  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  This  is 
an  amount  entirely  hopeless  even  to  the  most  zeal- 
ous infatuist.  Again,  let  us  allow,  as  we  know  to 
be  the  case,  that  it  is  not  the  interest  of  those  con- 
cerned to  give  up  this  large  amount  of  property 
without  a  just  remuneration  ;  yet  it  cannot  be  ex- 
pected that  the  government  should  undertake  to  pay 
this  remuneration,  which,  at  their  present  value  of 
$300  each,  would  require  $900,000,000  in  addition 
to  the  $150,000,000  necessary  to  carry  them  to  Af- 
rica :  an  amount  which  the  wise  will  not  contem- 
plate, and  which  the  ignorant  cannot  estimate. 

We  will  again  suppose  that  the  government  had 
both  the  will  and  the  credit  to  create  a  par  stock  to 
the  amount  of  the  purchase  of  this  property :  is  it 
fair  to  presume  that  the  owners  ever  would  consent 
thereto,  unless  the  immediate  cash  outlay  of  the 
$150,000,000  for  their  transportation  was  incurred  1 

Experience,  the  wisest  of  teachers,  in  recurring  to 
the  past  and  present  condition  of  the  free  coloured 
population  of  the  United  States,  has  given  an  unequiv- 
ocal negative  to  this  inquiry.  There  are,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  number,  seven  times  as  many  deaf  and 
dumb,  blind,  insane,  and  idiots  among  the  free  col- 
oured population  of  the  Northern  States  as  among 
the  slaves  of  the  South.  This  fact,  united  with  the 
startling  disproportion  of  crime  among  the  former 


ABOLITION.  421 

over  the  latter,  would  forever  prevent  the  abolition 
of  slavery,  when  the  emancipated  slave  is  to  sit 
down  by  the  side  of  his  late  master  in  the  enjoyr 
ment  of  the  same  political  rights,  to  create  nurseries 
of  vice  and  misery.  That  the  two  colours  can  oc- 
cupy the  same  country  without  degradation  attach- 
ing to  the  one  in  a  greater  degree  than  to  the  other 
is  supremely  absurd.  The  degraded  cast,  deprived 
of  the  honours  and  emoluments  of  office,  and  feel- 
ing their  unequal  station  in  society,  would  become 
the  natural  enemies  of  the  more  favoured  one,  which 
would  result  in  all  the  horrors  of  bloodshed.  The 
stronger  party  would  argue  that  their  safety  was  in 
the  annihilation  of  their  enemy,  which  would  be  the 
inevitable  end  either  of  the  white  or  black  commu- 
nity in  any  other  than  in  their  present  relations  of 
master  and  slave.  In  this  relation,  the  master  is  not 
the  enemy,  but  the  friend  and  protector  of  his  slave. 
He  is  so  from  interest,  and,  from  long  habit  of  pro- 
tection and  friendship,  is  so  from  choice.  He  is  the 
lawful  guardian  of  these  dependants,  and  interest, 
feeling,  law,  and  public  morality  require  him  to  be 
so — to  provide  them  with  food  and  raiment,  to  nurse 
them  in  sickness  and  in  health,  to  govern  them  with 
humanity.  In  an  immense  majority  of  the  slaves  of 
the  United  States,  they  value  this  protection ;  they 
feel  proud  of  their  master's  friendship ;  they  partake 
of  his  character  with  all  the  feelings  of  birth  or  aris- 
tocracy to  which  he  may  have  been  raised,  or  to 
which  pride,  circumstance,,  or  ambition  may  cause 


422  ABOLITION. 

him  to  aspire.  With  such  feelings,  millions  of  white 
and  black  do  live  in  friendship  ;  sever  these  ties,  and 
you  make  them  enemies  by  arming  each  with  polit- 
ical jealousies  which  must  prove  the  injury  of  both, 
and  certainly  the  destruction  of  one. 

Let  us  look  into  those  countries  of  Europe  where 
the  labouring  classes  are  said  to  be  the  best  off — in 
England,  Scotland,  France,  and  some  of  the  Ger- 
man states— in  those  countries  where  the  more  so- 
cial names  of  lord  and  tenant  are  used  instead  of 
master  and  slave,  as  in  the  United  States ;  and 
where  do  we  find  the  owner  responsible  under  all 
circumstances  for  the  food  and  raiment,  the  medi- 
cine and  physician's  bill  of  the  operative,  but  in  the 
United  States  and  Texas  \  In  these  countries,  the 
law  makes  it  the  master's  duty,  and  both  interest 
and  attachment  to  the  needy  and  afflicted  makes  it 
his  pleasure.  In  these  countries,  the  physician  who 
visits  the  master  also  visits  the  slave;  he  serves 
each  with  the  same  medicine  out  of  the  same 
spoon,  and  charges  the  identical  rates  per  mile  for 
visiting  the  one  as  the  other.  In  these  countries,  if 
from  drought  or  flood,  or  other  calamities,  dearth  en- 
sues, it  is  the  master's  duty  to  look  abroad  to  sup- 
ply the  deficiency.  From  the  first  settlement  of  the 
English  American  colonies  to  the  present  day,  there 
cannot  be  a  solitary  instance  cited  of  a  slave  perish- 
ing for  the  want  of  food.  We  do  not  believe  that 
the  same  can  be  said  of  any  other  nation,  in  this  or 
in  any  age,  where  the  peasant  is  dependant  upon 


ABOLITION.  423 

the  landlord  for  hire,  and  where  he  has  no  resource 
in  case  of  misfortune  or  calamity  to  fall  back  upon 
save  that  hire.  In  the  United  States  the  dearth  falls 
upon  the  master ;  in  Europe,  it  falls  upon  the  peas- 
ant. In  the  former  countries  the  master  is  the  re- 
sponsible commissariat  of  his  establishment ;  in  the 
latter,  the  land-rents  must  be  paid,  or  a  new  tenant- 
ry substituted,  and  the  greatest  want  will  be  endured 
by  the  tenant  sooner  than  the  loss  of  home.  Here, 
if  a  tenant  die  for  want  of  bread  or  medicine,  a  sur- 
plus labour  of  a  like  kind  supplies  his  place  at  as 
cheap  a  rate. 

It  is  very  true  that  in  most  European  countries 
their  poor  establishments  might  furnish  the  sim- 
ple article  of  medicine  necessary  to  check  disease. 
This  is  the  most  inconsiderable  item  towards  com- 
plete cure.  The  mode  of  giving  it,  nursing,  watch- 
ing, supplying  a  thousand  wants,  and  answering  as 
many  whims  of  the  sick  man,  complete  the  cure. 
Such  is  the  difference  between  the  European  hos- 
pitals, where  the  physician  administers  by  the  whole- 
sale, and  the  American  negro  quarter,  where  the 
master  sees  that  the  most  minute  instructions  of  the 
physician  is  attended  to,  and  where  the  wTants  and 
whims  of  the  patient  is  answered  by  a  sympathizing 
hand.  In  the  latter,  whatever  the  convalescent  ap- 
petite requires,  if  not  prohibited  by  the  physician,  is 
furnished,  and  at  proper  times  and  in  proper  quan- 
tities. Here  the  negro  resumes  his  labour  when  he 
feels  perfectly  able  to  do  so,  and  not  like  the  Euro- 


424  ABOLITION, 

pean  pauper,  who,  to  escape  the  constraints  of  the 
poorhouse,  and  mingle  with  his  every-day  associa- 
tions, goes  forth,  half  cured  and  half  unprovided  for, 
to  relapse  into  worse  sickness. 

Knowing,  as  we  do,  the  improved  moral  and  phys- 
ical condition  of  the  slaves  of  the  United  States 
and  Texas  over  their  former  naked,  ignorant,  and 
cannibal  condition  in  Africa,  we  feel  conscious  of 
no  moral  wrong  in  their  present  ownership.  We 
believe  that  this  relationship  is  the  happiest  both  for 
their  physical  condition  and  general  mental  capabil- 
ity. 

Had  Mr.  O'Connell,  the  disturber  of  his  own 
country,  the  calumniator  of  ours,  and  the  reviler  of 
Washington,  known  more  of  this  institution,  both  jus- 
tice and  common  sense  would  have  taught  him  that 
his  transcendent  talents  might  be  employed  in  a  bet- 
ter manner  than  in  a  lifetime  of  abuse  of  that  coun- 
try which  has  opened  wide  the  door  of  competence 
and  happiness  to  hundreds  of  thousands  of  his  own 
destitute  countrymen.  We  have  the  evidence  of 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  as  honest  Irishmen  as 
Mr.  O'Connell,  that  the  worst  possible  condition  of 
our  negroes  is  far  better  than  millions  of  their  own 
citizens ;  and  while  we  deeply  sympathize  with 
these  suffering  millions,  our  sympathy  can  never 
excite  them  to  an  unwise  opposition  to  their  own 
government;  that  sympathy  is  to  be  found  in  our 
open  houses,  in  our  well-filled  granaries,  around  our 
hospitable  hearths,  and  deeply  rooted  in  our  political 
Constitution. 


ABOLITION.  425 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  within  the  last  twenty 
years  a  wonderful  revolution  has  taken  place  in  the 
United  States  in  the  improvement  of  the  slave's  con- 
dition, and  that  this  improvement  is  still  going  on. 
The  legislatures  of  the  states  have  interposed  their 
protection,  while  a  true  domestic  economy  has  de- 
monstrated the  fact,  that  the  better  fed  and  clothed, 
the  more  profitable  the  negro.  That  which  has 
done  most  for  this  improvement  is  a  charitable  mo- 
rality, already  wide,  and  still  spreading  throughout  the 
slave  portion  of  the  Union.  That  just  public  opin- 
ion throughout  the  country,  which  stamps  the  bad 
master  as  the  bad  man,  has  done,  and  is  still  do- 
ing more  for  this  improvement  than  all  other  causes. 
The  master  who  would  be  guilty  of  wanton  cruelty 
towards  his  slave  is  marked  by  his  neighbour  as  a 
mean  man ;  and,  feeling  this  blighting  judgment  in  all 
his  intercourse,  he  alters  this  treatment  as  he  would 
avoid  any  other  act  which  would  bring  upon  him 
public  reprobation. 

It  was  the  writer's  fortune  to  have  been  born  a 
slave-owner  in  one  of  the  most  densely-populated 
slave  districts  of  the  Roanoke,  and  a  twenty  years' 
acquaintance  in  the  Southern  slave  portion  of  the 
United  States  has  convinced  him  of  the  truth  of 
these  remarks.  He  believes  that  he  hazards  noth- 
ing in  the  assertion  that  the  general  condition  of 
the  Southern  slaves  is  infinitely  superior  to  that  of 
the  free  people  of  colour  in  the  North.  He  will  ex- 
tend his  remarks  to  Texas,  and,  from  an  eight  years' 

3H 


426  ABOLITION. 

residence  in  this  republic,  assert,  from  positive 
knowledge,  that  the  condition  of  her  slaves  are  in- 
comparably superior  to  the  free  negroes  of  the  North, 
and  better  than  any  other  portion  of  the  slaves  of 
the  South.  And  why  1  Because  here  is  a  climate 
better  suited  to  their  constitutions,  and  a  soil  more 
capable  of  a  free  and  abundant  produce,  which 
makes  the  necessaries  of  living  cheaper. 

The  truth  of  this  remark  will  not  be  difficult  of 
comprehension  when  we  state  the  fact  that  a  beeve 
weighing  from  seven  hundred  to  one  thousand 
pounds  can  be  raised  in  Texas  at  a  less  expense  to 
the  owner  than  a  chicken  can  in  Virginia,  in  which 
its  owner  finds  his  profits  in  raising  and  selling  at 
one  dime.  The  last  season,  in  a  large  portion  of 
Texas,  a  market  could  not  be  had  for  pork  at  one 
cent  per  pound,  and  corn  at  twelve  cents  per  bush- 
el. In  illustration  of  this  subject,  one  other  fact 
may  not  be  out  of  place  here — that  in  most  any 
portion  of  Texas,  the  best  beeves  maybe  purchased 
at  an  amount  which  the  hides  and  tallow  will  bring 
in  market,  leaving  the  large  amount  of  flesh  with- 
out cost  to  the  consumer.  It  may  be  asked  with 
propriety  by  a  person  unacquainted  with  this  fact, 
Why  does  not  the  raiser  butcher  his  own  beeves, 
and  thereby  save  the  flesh  ?  There  are  good  rea- 
sons why  he  does  not.  It  is  his  business  to  rear 
cattle,  and  not  to  butcher  them.  Large  stocks  are 
owned  by  persons  who  have  but  little  else,  and 
whose    occupation   it  is  to  brand  the  calf  when 


ABOLITION.  427 

young,  and  look  after  the  herd  sufficiently,  while 
raising,  to  keep  them  together.  He  consequently 
has  neither  time  nor  means  to  prepare  the  hides  or 
tallow  for  market,  and  sells  the  beeves  on  foot  at  his 
cow-pen. 

With  these  facts  before  us,  how  worthless  should 
be  that  specious  but  mistaken  fanaticism  which 
dwells  with  such  eloquence  about  slavery,  which 
excites  such  false  sympathies  about  the  "traffic  in 
human  blood,"  and  which  seeks  to  level  three  mil- 
lions of  human  beings  to  the  wretched  misery  and 
wants  of  the  free  negroes  of  the  North,  or  the  freed 
cast  of  Mexico. 

I  am  justified  in  my  observations  while  in  Mex- 
ico by  all  late  writers,  that  the  boasted  freedom  of 
that  country  is  a  slavery  in  its  horrid  realities  which 
attaches  nowhere  to  the  descendants  of  Englishmen; 
that  their  freedom  is  only  in  name,  for  want  and 
wretchedness,  general  ignorance  and  slavish  humil- 
ity, are  seen  there  such  as  I  have  never,  in  a  solitary 
instance,  witnessed  in  the  slave  portion  of  the  United 
States.  Mr.  Stephens,  in  his  late  work  on  Yucatan, 
gives  the  following  description  of  this  freedom  in 
that  country,  which  I  copy,  from  its  faithfulness  to 
my  own  observation  throughout  Mexico.  He  says : 
"Looking  into  the  corridor,  we  saw  the  poor  Indian 
on  his  knees  on  the  pavement,  with  his  arms  clasp- 
ed around  the  knees  of  another  Indian,  so  as  to 
present  his  back  fairly  to  the  lash.  At  every  blow 
he  rose  on  one  knee,  and  sent  forth  a  piercing  cry. 


428  ABOLITION. 

He  seemed  struggling  to  retain  it,  but  it  burst  forth 
in  spite  of  all  his  efforts.  His  whole  bearing  show- 
ed the  subdued  character  of  the  present  Indians,  and 
with  the  last  stripe  the  expression  of  his  face  seem- 
ed that  of  thankfulness  for  not  getting  more.  With- 
out uttering  a  word,  he  crept  to  the  major  domo, 
took  his  hand,  kissed  it,  and  walked  away.  No 
sense  of  degradation  crossed  his  mind.  Indeed,  so 
humble  is  this  once  fierce  people,  that  they  have  a 
proverb  of  their  own,  'Los  Indios  no  oyen  sino  po  las 
nalas — the  Indians  only  hear  through  their  backs." 

As  I  have  said  before,  having  been  born  and  brought 
up  in  the  slave  portion  of  the  United  States,  and 
been  the  owner  of  slaves  all  my  life,  I  do  aver  that  I 
never  saw  or  heard  of  such  a  case  of  slavish  humil- 
ity, of  servile  abasement,  which,  if  anything  could, 
should  have  disarmed  law  of  its  justice,  and  un- 
nerved the  vengeance  of  a  bloodhound.  It  is  true 
that  I  have  often  known  slaves  improperly  punish- 
ed, and  equally  true  that  I  have  more  frequently 
known  them  to  escape  just  punishment ;  but  I  again 
repeat,  that  I  never  saw  or  heard  in  the  United 
States  such  abasement  as  Mr.  Stephens  relates,  and 
many  instances  which  I  witnessed  myself  in  Mexico, 
where,  at  each  stroke  of  the  lash,  the  miserable  Pe- 
on praises  his  God,  "Alabo  a  Dios"  on  account  of 
his  master's  mercy. 

It  was  common,  upon  our  arrival  at  a  hacienda  in 
Mexico,  to  be  struck  with  the  conspicuous  position 
of  the  stocks,  a  machine  for  punishment.     This  ma- 


ABOLITION.  429 

chine  is  made  of  two  pieces  of  timber,  each  about 
thirty  feet  in  length,  and  three  inches  thick  by 
twelve  in  breadth.  These  timbers  are  placed  one 
upon  the  other  edgewise,  and  at  every  few  feet  there 
is  a  hole  large  enough  for  one's  neck,  and  a  smaller 
one  on  each  side  for  the  wrist.  For  dereliction  of 
duty,  among  other  punishments,  the  petit  tyrant, 
who  presides  over  these  estates  as  alcalde,  con- 
demns the  poor  Peon's  neck  and  wrist  to  this  cruel 
duress  ;  and  the  amount  of  punishment  may  be  es- 
timated at  these  haciendas  when  we  state  that  these 
machines,  each  capable  of  punishing  twelve  or  fifteen 
at  a  time,  were  filled.  I  cannot  err  in  saying  that,  if 
the  owner  of  negroes  in  the  United  States  were  to 
permit  such  an  instrument  of  torture  upon  his  plan- 
tation, public  reprobation,  universal  and  overwhelm- 
ing, would  cause  him  to  abandon  the  neighbourhood 
thus  outraged.  Neither  in  the  United  States  nor 
in  Texas  will  the  intelligence  of  the  age  allow 
of  vindictive  punishment,  even  were  that  demoniac 
feeling  the  constitutional  inheritance  of  so  brave  and 
proud  a  people.* 

*  Since  writing  the  above,  both  truth  and  candour  require  the  au- 
thor to  state,  that  in  his  travels  in  Texas  he  has  witnessed,  upon  the 
plantation  of  one  of  the  citizens  of  the  republic,  treatment  of  his  slaves 
which  forms  the  only  exception,  in  this  community,  of  what  is  above 
asserted.  I  witnessed  working  at  the  cotton  scaffold  three  Africans 
wearing  what  the  overseer  familiarly  called  "necklaces."  This  "  neck- 
lace" consisted  of  a  circular  piece  of  iron,  the  ends  of  which  were  fas- 
tened upon  the  back  of  the  head  with  a  stout  padlock.  This  circular 
iron  band  rested  in  front  upon  the  mouth,  attached  to  which  was  an- 
other iron  inserted  in  the  open  mouth.  A  second  iron  band  was  welded 
at  right  angles  to  the  first,  immediately  in  front  of  the  mouth,  and  pass- 


430  ABOLITION. 

With  these  facts,  which  are  familiar  to  the  intelli- 
gence of  the  South,  ought  the  anti-slavery  fanaticism 
of  the  North  to  be  viewed  in  any  other  light  than  un- 
pardonable ignorance  or  unwarrantable  impudence  ? 
This  remarkable  fact  is  observable,  that  those  who 
mostly  concern  themselves  about  this  institution  are 
those  who  know  least  about  it ;  and  when  they  have 
occasionally  had  a  response  from  better  intelligence, 
it  has  been  unfortunate  for  their  cause  that  such  re- 
sponse is  traceable  to  the  demagogue,  who  hopes  to 
gather  from  such  a  harvest  stores  which  will  serve 
his  ambition.  When  a  gifted  and  leading  Northern 
politician  has  dignified  it  as  a  "  great  moral  question 
which  must  and  will  be  heard,"  it  was  unfortunate 
for  that  individual,  with  his  great  and  comprehensive 
intellect,  that  he  was  so  little  acquainted  with  the 
real  institution,  or  it  is  hardly  probable  that  he  would 

ed  over  the  top  of  the  head,  thence  down  in  the  direction  of  the  padlock 
behind.  Thus  "  necklaced,"  these  slaves  had  neither  power  to  eat, 
drink,  nor  speak,  and  at  stated  periods  the  "  necklace"  was  taken  off  to 
afford  them  sustenance.  They  were  working  bareheaded,  under  a  burn- 
ing August  sun,  in  the  29th  degree  of  north  latitude.  The  reader  can  best 
imagine  to  himself  the  power  of  the  sun  upon  these  irons,  and  they  in 
contact  with  the  naked  flesh.  I  could  imagine  no  crime  so  heinous  as  to 
justify  the  punishment  of  this  damnable  machine.  Upon  inquiry,  I  was 
informed  that  they  were  made  to  wear  these  machines  to  prevent  them 
from  "  eating  dirt,"  a  desire  occasioned  by  a  morbid  appetite  which  I 
have  known  both  in  white  and  black.  I  have  since  learned  that  these 
irons  were  to  prevent  them  from  absconding. 

I  am  sensible  that  the  abolitionist  will  triumph  at  this  circumstance ; 
yet  they  will  have  but  a  lean  argument  in  condemning  the  humanity  of 
a  thousand  good  on  account  of  the  cruelty  of  one  bad  master.  It  would 
be  as  reasonable  were  the  censorious  to  condemn  the  whole  Protestant 
Church  for  the  crimes  of  one  pastor,  or  the  amours  of  a  bishop. 


ABOLITION.  431 

have  endorsed  a  popular  fallacy — a  sophism  such  as 
schoolboys  may  debate  in  their  college  walls,  but 
such  as  practical  experience  does  not  justify. 

In  Mexico  I  saw  a  number  of  negroes  who  had 
absconded  from  Texas,  and  in  no  case  did  I  see  one 
whose  condition  was  bettered,  but,  in  most  instances, 
vastly  worse.  I  saw  several  anxious  to  return  to 
their  owners,  and  nearly  all,  by  a  few  months'  resi- 
dence, were  as  degraded  as  the  mass  of  Mexicans. 
They  were  extremely  destitute ;  they  who  previous- 
ly never  had  a  care,  and  who  knew  it  was  their  mas- 
ter's business  to  clothe,  feed,  and  provide  them  with 
every  necessary,  now  found  liberty  an  unreal  phan- 
tom ;  they  found  in  it  a  licentious  indulgence,  which, 
instead  of  giving  them  food  and  raiment,  brought  in 
its  train  misery  and  wo. 

After  all,  I  am  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  sla- 
very, as  applied  to  this  institution,  is  but  an  ugly 
name,  and  liberty,  as  applied  to  nineteen  twentieths 
of  the  people  of  Mexico,  but  a  handsome  one,  and 
that  the  true  condition  of  these  two  countries  would 
warrant  a  reverse  of  these  terms ;  that  they  are  in 
either,  eo  nomine,  arbitrary.  Let  us  look  into  the 
mines  and  manufactories  of  European  countries — let 
us  go  among  their  destitute  millions — let  us  look  into 
the  workshops  and  factories  of  our  own  free  North, 
and  compare  their  condition — we  are  forced  to  be- 
lieve that  the  liberty  of  the  former  is  a  delusion, 
while  the  slavery  of  the  latter  is  the  better  condition. 

From  these  condensed  reasons,  it  is  plain  to  my 


432  ABOLITION. 

mind  that  no  circumstances  can  ever  occur  which 
will  allow  the  abolition  of  slavery  throughout  the 
United  States,  and  permit  the  manumitted  slaves  to 
an  equal  participation  either  in  the  rights  of  domicil 
or  citizenship.  It  is  equally  clear,  that  while  it  is 
not  the  will  of  those  interested  at  present  to  allow  it, 
yet,  if  it  were,  neither  individuals  nor  government 
have  the  means  either  of  purchasing  or  transporting 
this  population  to  Africa.  If,  then,  no  such  means 
at  present  exist,  how  much  better  able  would  govern- 
ment be  at  the  end  of  twenty-five  years,  when  the 
amount  required  would  be  doubled,  and  at  fifty  years, 
when  it  would  be  quadrupled  1  It  is  a  reasonable 
calculation,  that  at  the  end  of  fifty  years  the  colour- 
ed population  of  the  United  States  will  exceed  twelve 
millions;  and,  estimating  their  then  value  by  their 
average  value  for  the  last  fifty  years,  with  the  cost 
of  transporting  them  to  Africa,  it  would  exceed  the 
national  debt  of  Great  Britain,  or  three  times  the 
amount  of  every  specie  dollar  in  circulation  through- 
out Christendom,  and  would  require  all  the  navies 
of  Great  Britain,  France,  Russia,  and  the  United 
States  twelve  years  to  transport  them,  allowing  each 
vessel  to  make  three  trips  per  annum,  and  carry 
three  hundred  souls  each  over  and  above  their  own 
complement  of  men. 

If  we  look  to  what  most  certainly  will  be  the  ag- 
gregate of  this  population  within  the  lifetime  of 
many  of  our  children  now  born,  and  estimating  that 
aggregate  by  their  average  increase  for  the  last  fifty 


ABOLITION.  433 

years,  we  conclude  that  the  generation  now  coming 
upon  the  stage  will  see  the  monstrous  whole  of  twen- 
ty millions.  To  the  political  philanthropist,  who 
may  reasonably  calculate  many  changes  of  interest 
and  policy,  which  may  by  this  time  spring  up  be- 
tween the  master  and  these  probable  unprofitable 
millions,  his  mind  should  seek  to  provide  for  them 
against  a  destiny  so  impending.  A  sure  and  certain 
provision  is  in  the  reach  of  the  politicians  of  that 
country.  It  requires  boldness  to  avow  it,  but  that 
boldness  is  based  upon  the  great  necessity  of  the 
case,  and,  as  such,  the  justice  of  nations  will  acqui- 
esce in  the  measure.  To  provide  these  existing  and 
forthcoming  millions  with  a  country  accessible,  and 
a  climate  suitable  to  that  physical  constitution  which 
the  great  Author  of  the  universe  has  given  them,  our 
southern  boundary  should  extend  to  the  twentieth  de- 
gree of  north  latitude,  and  nearly  all  will  be  accom- 
plished which  human  wisdom  can  provide.  Here  is 
a  country  in  soil,  climate,  and  every  other  consider- 
ation far  superior  to  the  best  portions  of  their  native 
continent,  within  reach,  and  in  the  immediate  direc- 
tion of  that  great  tide  of  emigration  which  is  fast 
sweeping  them  from  the  ungenial  and  unprofitable 
North.  By  the  immediate  contiguity  of  this  coun- 
try to  the  United  States,  it  will  cost  no  greater  out- 
lay of  means  to  transport  them  than  the  natural 
course  of  events  will  create  and  provide  for. 

If  the  object  of  the  abolitionist  is  benevolence  to 
the  black  race^ — if  he  wishes  to  avert  this  possible 

31 


434  ABOLITION. 

calamity  and  ruin — he  should  urge  upon  his  govern- 
ment the  acquisition  of  that  which  will  most  certain- 
ly effect  it.  Without  professing  to  see  farther  in  fu- 
turity than  the  lights  which  past  experience  will  jus- 
tify, it  does  appear  to  my  mind  that  in  seventy  years, 
when  the  coloured  population  of  the  United  States 
shall  have  increased  to  twenty,  and  the  white,  in 
their  proportionate  ratio,  to  one  hundred  and  thirty 
millions,  many,  very  many  reasons  teach  that  so 
many  people,  so  differently  marked  by  nature,  can- 
not live  in  harmony  within  the  present  limits  of  that 
country.  That  in  view  of  the  case,  whether  their 
relative  political  condition  shall  remain  as  at  pres- 
ent, or  undergo  the  worst  radical  changes,  the  same 
good  reasons  urge  this  measure.  How  solicitous, 
then,  should  the  busy  politician  of  that  country  now 
feel,  when,  in  acting,  or  in  failing  to  act  upon  this 
subject,  he  knows  that  the  weal  or  wo  of  his  chil- 
dren, and  his  children's  children,  is  so  directly  con- 
cerned. He  should  approach  the  subject  with  the 
anxiety  of  a  father  who  wishes  to  leave  to  his  off- 
spring the  inheritance  of  no  litigious  interest,  and 
feels  that  in  its  present  settlement  he  wills  to  that 
posterity  a  long  and  glorious  welfare. 

If  the  declaration  of  the  English  government  is 
uninfluenced  by  national  aggrandizement,  but  alone 
by  the  philanthropic  desire  of  promoting  the  wel- 
fare and  happiness  of  this  race,  she  must  rejoice  in 
an  event  so  calculated  to  promote  this  end  as  the 
settlement  of  this  country  with  the  blacks  of  the 


ABOLITION.  435 

United  States.  It  is  a  law  well  settled,  both  in  the 
physiology  of  animals  and  plants,  that  the  farther 
you  remove  either  from  their  natural  climate,  so  in 
proportion  to  that  distance  are  they  subject  to  an 
increase  of  disease.  The  United  States  census  of 
1840  has  given  a  melancholy  iustance  of  this  fact 
in  the  returns  from  the  two  extremes  of  that  Repub- 
lic :  in  the  State  of  Maine,  being  the  most  northern, 
one  is  either  deaf,  dumb,  blind,  or  an  idiot,  out  of 
every  twelve,  while  in  Florida,  the  most  southern, 
one  out  of  each  eleven  hundred  and  five  are  thus 
afflicted,  the  difference  in  favour  of  southern  cli- 
mate being  ninety-two  to  one.  Allowing  that  much 
of  this  disease  in  Maine  is  the  result  of  freeing  a 
people  incapable  of  properly  providing  for  themselves, 
still  these  facts  must  be  so  convincing  to  the  philan- 
thropist as  to  cause  him  to  use  all  proper  means  to 
restore  the  coloured  race  to  as  near  their  native  cli- 
mate as  practicable 


APPENDIX, 


No.  I. 

A  List  of  Texians  who  Fought  in  the  Battle  of  Mier  on  the  25th  and  26th  De- 
cember, 1842. 


No.               Names. 

Residence. 

Nativity.                    Remar 

1  Ackerman,  Peter, 

Bastrop, 

New- York. 

2  Alexander,  John  R., 

Brazoria, 

Indiana. 

3  Alexander,  Matthew, 

Jackson, 

Tennessee. 

4  Alexander,  W.  A., 

Milam, 

Ohio. 

5  Allen,  David, 

Harris, 

Virginia. 

6  Anderson,  George, 

Victoria, 

Scotland. 

7  Armstrong,  Alexander, 

Fort  Bend, 

Louisiana. 

8  Armstrong,  James  C, 

Washington 

,  Tennessee. 

9  Arthur,  F., 

Fayette, 

Massachusetts. 

10  Atwood,  William, 

England. 

11  Austin,  James, 

Brazoria, 

Missouri. 

12  Baker,  John  R., 

Refugio, 

Tennessee,        Captain. 

13  Barber,  James, 

Bastrop, 

Massachusetts. 

14  Barney,  Daniel  F., 

Washington 

,  Kentucky. 

15  Barney,  T.  A. 

Fort  Bend, 

Vermont. 

16  Bassett,R.P., 

Washington 

,  Kentucky. 

17  Beale,  Robert, 

Fort  Bend, 

Dist.  Columbia.         s 

18  Beard,  Robert, 

Fort  Bend, 

Missouri. 

19  Beard,  William, 

Fort  Bend, 

Missouri. 

20  Beasley,  D.  H.  E., 

Brazoria, 

North  Carolina 

21  Bell,  Thomas  W., 

Fayette, 

North  Carolina. 

22  Bennett,  Samuel  P., 

Austin, 

Tennessee. 

23  Berry,  Bate  J., 

Jackson, 

Indiana. 

24  Berry,  Joseph, 

Jackson, 

Indiana. 

25  Bideler,  John, 

Milam, 

Pennsylvania. 

26  Blackburn,  John, 

Fayette, 

Tennessee. 

27  Blanton,  John  B., 

Fayette, 

Georgia. 

28  Bobo,  Lynn, 

Victoria, 

South  Carolina. 

29  Boon,  Benjamin, 

Missouri. 

30  Boswell,  Ransom, 

Milam. 

Georgia. 

31  Bowman,  B.  F., 

Bastrop, 

New- York. 

32  Bray,  F., 

Victoria. 

Germany. 

438 


APPENDIX    NO.  I. 


No.  Names. 

33  Brennan,  John, 

34  Brennem,  Richard  F., 

35  Bridger,  Henry, 

36  Brown,  Richard, 

37  Brush,  Gilbert  R., 

38  Bryant,  W.  B.  0., 

39  Burras,  A.  T., 

40  Burk,  James, 

41  Bush, , 

42  Buster,  Claudius, 

43  Calvert,  John, 

44  Cameron,  Ewin, 

45  Canfield,  Israel, 

46  Carter,  William  T., 

47  Cash,  L.  L., 

48  Censibeau,  T.  J., 

49  Chalk,  Winfield, 

50  Clark,  Willis  G., 

51  Clarke,  Charles, 

52  Clopton,  William, 

53  Cocke,  J.  D., 

54  Cody,  W.  H., 

55  Colville,  Thomas, 

56  Copeland,  Willis, 

57  Cox,  Thomas  W., 

58  Crawford,  Robert  M., 

59  Crittenden,  George  B., 

60  Davis,  Campbell, 

61  Davis,  Daniel, 

62  Davis,  Thomas, 

63  Davis,  William, 

64  Davis,  W.  K., 

65  Dickson, , 

66  Dillon,  John  F., 

67  Dougherty,  Patrick, 

68  Douglas,  Freeman  W., 

69  Downes,  N.  G., 

70  Dunbar,  William, 

71  Dunham,  Robert, 

72  Dusenberry,  John, 

73  Eastland,  William  M., 


Residence.  Nativity.  Remarks. 

Victoria,         New- York. 

Travis,  Kentucky,  M.D. 

Gonzales,       Pennsylvania. 

Liberty,  South  Carolina. 

Fort  Bend,     New- York,         Boy. 

Fort  Bend. 

Austin,  Kentucky. 

Fort  Bend,      Ohio. 

Washington,  Canada. 

Washington,  Kentucky,  Captain. 

Tennessee. 
Victoria,         Scotland,  Captain. 

Refugio,         New- Jersey. 
Victoria,         North  Carolina. 
Victoria,         Pennsylvania. 
Washington,  Tennessee. 
Milam,  Virginia. 

Jackson,         Missouri. 
Brazoria,        New- York,         Lieutenant. 
Bastrop,         Tennessee,        Lieutenant. 
Harris,  Virginia. 

Austin,  Tennessee. 

Harris,  Scotland. 

Nacogdoches,  Ohio. 
Fayette,         Kentucky,  Lieutenant. 

Ireland. 
Fort  Bend,     Kentucky,  Lieutenant. 

Washington,  Tennessee. 
Victoria,         Kentucky. 
Washington,  New- York. 
Bastrop,         Maryland. 
Fort  Bend,     Alabama. 
Harrison,        Indiana. 
Victoria,         Tennessee. 

Ireland. 
Brazoria,        Georgia,  Lieutenant, 

Victoria,         Connecticut. 
Bastrop,         Tennessee. 
Montgomery,  Tennessee. 
Harris,  New- York. 

Fayette,         Tennessee,        Captain. 


APPENDIX    NO.   I. 


439 


No.               Names. 

Residence. 

Nativity. 

Remarks. 

74  Edwards,  LeonidasD.F. 

.,  Washington, 

Tennessee. 

75  Este,  Edward, 

Harris, 

New-Jersey. 

76  Fisher,  William  S., 

Washington, 

Virginia, 

Commander. 

77  Fitzgerald,  John, 

Fort  Bend, 

Ireland. 

78  Frensley,  William  H., 

Fort  Bend, 

Tennessee. 

79  Gattis,  D.  H., 

Travis, 

Alabama. 

80  Gibson,  F.  M., 

Fort  Bend, 

Georgia, 

Qu'rmaster. 

81  Gibson,  William, 

Travis, 

Ohio. 

82  Glascock,  James  A., 

Victoria, 

Kentucky. 

• 

83  Gleason,  Cyrus  K., 

Victoria, 

New- York. 

84  Goodman,  Stephen, 

Fort  Bend, 

Alabama. 

85  Green,  Thomas  J., 

Brazoria, 

North  Carolina, 

(  Com.  of  flotilla 
(    and  r't.  wing-. 

86  Grosjean,  P.  C, 

France. 

87  Grubs,  F., 

Montgomery,  Alabama. 

88  Hallowell,  Daniel  A., 

Tennessee. 

89  Hanna, , 

Montgomery,  South  Carolina. 

90  Hannom,  William  H., 

Washington 

,  Georgia. 

91  Harris,  Robert, 

Travis, 

Mississippi. 

92  Harrison,  F.  W.  T., 

Washington 

,  Alabama. 

93  Harvey,  John, 

Brazoria, 

Kentucky. 

94  Hasmore,  William  H., 

Georgia. 

95  Hays,  Lewis, 

South  Carolina. 

96  Heddenburg,  Abr'm.  D., 

,  Montgomery,  New- York. 

97  Henrie,  Daniel  Drake, 

Brazoria, 

Ohio, 

(  Late  Midship. 
1    in  U.S.N. 

98  Hensley,  Charles, 

Washington 

,  Tennessee. 

99  Hill,  Asa, 

Fayette, 

North  Carolina. 

100  Hill,  Charles, 

Bastrop, 

England. 

101  Hill,  Jeffrey, 

Fayette, 

Georgia. 

/  The    smallest 

102  Hill,  John, 

Fayette, 

Georgia, 

)  boy  at  Mier 
'j  — adopted  by 
'    Santa  Anna. 

103  Hoffer,  John, 

Pennsylvania. 

104  Holderman,  Allen, 

Bastrop, 

Kentucky. 

105  Hopson,  William, 

Gonzales, 

Kentucky. 

106  Hugh,  Frank, 

Milam, 

Pennsylvania. 

107  Humphries,  J.  J., 

Milam, 

Tennessee. 

108  Irvin.  John, 

Pennsylvania. 

109  Isam,  Zed.,  alias  Iceland 

,  Gonzales, 

Germany. 

110  Jackson,  A., 

Harris, 

Ireland. 

Ill  Jackson,  Edward  B., 

Liberty, 

Pennsylvania. 

112  Johnson,  Jack, 

Bexar, 

Virginia. 

440 


APPENDIX   NO.    I. 


No.  Names. 

113  Jones,  John  E., 

114  Jones,  Thomas  L., 

115  Jones,  Wiley, 

116  Journie,  H., 

117  Kaigler,  William, 

118  Kaughman,  E.  G., 

119  Kean,  Edward, 

120  Kean,  Richard, 

121  Kelly,  Charles  S., 

122  King,  R.  B., 

123  Kirkendall,  Hanks, 

124  Lacy,  John, 

125  Laforge,  A.  B., 

126  Lee,  Alfred  A., 

127  Lehan,  Jerry, 

128  Lewis,  A.  J., 

129  Lewis,  William  B., 

130  Livergood,  G.  H., 

131  Locherman,  Stanley, 

132  Lord,  George, 

133  Lusk,  P.  H., 

134  Lyon,  Samuel  C., 

135  Lyons,  Patrick, 

136  Mahan,  Patrick. 

137  Malby,  T.  D., 

138  Mallen,  Nathan, 

139  Martin,  William, 

140  Matthews,  Alexander, 

141  Maxwell,  P.  M., 

142  Middleton,  Bemoni, 

143  Middleton,  William  B., 

144  Miller,  William  (Dutch), 

145  Miller,  William, 

146  Millon,  W.  E.  (late  Capt), 

147  Mills,  John, 

148  Mills,  Lawson, 

149  Mitchell,  William, 

150  Moore,  William  H., 

151  Moore,  William, 

152  Morehead,  Jonathan, 

153  Morgan,  John, 


Residence. 

Nativity.                    Remarks. 

Harris, 

England. 

Travis, 

Kentucky. 

Milam, 

Alabama. 

Matagorda, 

New- York. 

Bexar, 

Georgia. 

Bastrop, 

Tennessee. 

Washington 

,  Kentucky. 

Washington 

,  Kentucky. 

Fort  Bend, 

Connecticut. 

Montgomery,  Tennessee. 

Fort  Bend, 

Tennessee. 

Galveston, 

Ireland. 

Liberty, 

New- York. 

Victoria, 

North  Carolina,  Lieutenant. 

Victoria, 

Ireland. 

Brazoria, 

Alabama. 

Victoria, 

Ohio. 

Jackson, 

Pennsylvania. 

Colorado. 

Victoria, 

England. 

Washington 

,  Tennessee. 

Brazoria, 

England,            Sailingmaster 

Milam, 

Ireland. 

Victoria, 

Ireland. 

Connecticut. 

Bexar, 

Massachusetts. 

Jackson, 

Kentucky. 

Gonzales, 

Tennessee. 

Liberty, 

Illinois. 

Liberty, 

Illinois. 

Montgomery 

',  Illinois. 

Germany. 

Brazoria, 

Tennessee. 

Harris, 

Virginia. 

Victoria, 

Tennessee. 

Victoria, 

Tennessee. 

Washington, 

,  Missouri. 

Milam, 

Canada. 

Fort  Bend, 

Missouri. 

Victoria, 

Germany 

Bastrop, 

England. 

APPENDIX    NO.    T. 


441 


No.               Names. 

Residence. 

Nativity. 

Remarks. 

154  Morrell,  H.  B., 

Fort  Bend, 

Georgia. 

155  Morris,  William, 

Fort  Bend, 

Louisiana. 

156  Mosier,  Abram, 

Matagorda, 

Louisiana. 

157  Marry,  Thomas  A., 

Victoria, 

Ireland, 

Adjutant 

158  M'Cauley,  Malcolm, 

Harris, 

Scotland. 

159  M'Cutcheon,  J.  D., 

Washington 

,  Tennessee. 

160  M'Dade, . 

% 

161  M'Donald,  Daniel, 

Victoria, 

New- York. 

162  M'Fall,  Samuel, 

Milam, 

Missouri. 

163  M'Ginly,  John, 

Montgomery,  Pennsylvania. 

164  M'lllrea,  William  J., 

Bastrop, 

Pennsylvania. 

165  M'Kendall, , 

Harris, 

Scotland. 

166  M'Laughlin,  Charles, 

Harris, 

England, 

Draughtsman 

167  M'Lelland,  Samuel, 

Liberty, 

Ireland. 

168  M'Math, , 

Washington 

,  Georgia, 

M.D 

169  M'Micken,  James, 

Victoria, 

Virginia. 

170  M'Mullen,  John, 

Galveston, 

Maryland. 

171  Nealy,  James  B., 

Montgomery,  Alabama. 

172  Nealy,  James  H., 

Austin, 

South  Carolina 

173  Nelson,  Thomas, 

Fayette, 

Tennessee. 

174  Oats,  Harvey  H., 

Fayette, 

Kentucky. 

175  Ogden,  James, 

Travis, 

Virginia. 

176  Oldham,  William, 

Milam, 

Virginia. 

177  Overton, , 

Brazos, 

Mississippi. 

178  Owen,  John, 

Brazoria, 

Pennsylvania. 

179  Peacock,  James, 

Victoria, 

Tennessee. 

180  Phelps,  Orlando, 

Brazoria, 

Mississippi. 

181  Pierson,  J.  G.  W., 

Montgomery 

,  North  Carolina, 

,  Captain. 

182  Piland,  George  W., 

Fort  Bend, 

Tennessee. 

183  Pilley,  Robert  M., 

Harris, 

England. 

184  Pitts,  E.  H., 

Fort  Bend, 

Georgia. 

185  Porter,  Elisha, 

Milam, 

Tennessee. 

186  Randolph,  Perry, 

Montgomery,  Alabama. 

187  Reese,  C.  K., 

Brazoria, 

Kentucky, 

Captain. 

188  Reese,  William, 

Brazoria, 

Kentucky, 

Boy. 

189  Rice,  James  0., 

Travis, 

South  Carolina. 

190  Rice,  Lorenzo, 

Bexar, 

Maryland. 

191  Rice,  Sandford, 

Harris, 

New- York. 

192  Riley,  Francis, 

Fort  Bend, 

Ireland. 

193  Ripley,  William, 

Victoria, 

Pennsylvania. 

194  Roark,  A.  J., 

Fort  Bend, 

3  L 

Tennessee. 

442 


APPENDIX  NO.  I. 


No.               Names. 

Residence. 

Nativity. 

Remarks. 

195  Roberts,  0., 

Milam, 

Tennessee. 

196  Roberts,  H.  H., 

Harris, 

North  Carolina 

197  Rocky  fellow,  Peter, 

Jackson, 

New- York. 

198  Rogers,  Mark, 

Bastrop, 

Tennessee. 

199  Rowan,  William, 

Fort  Bend, 

Georgia. 

200  Runyan,  William  J., 

Sabine, 

Georgia. 

201  Ryan,  William, 

Fort  Bend, 

Kentucky, 

Captain. 

202  Sansberry,  John, 

Fort  Bend, 

Kentucky. 

203  Sargeant,  Carter, 

Bastrop, 

Kentucky. 

204  Sargeant,  William, 

Bastrop, 

Kentucky. 

205  Saunders,  Leonidas, 

Montgomery,  Tennessee. 

206  Scott,  William  Y., 

Milam, 

Georgia. 

207  Sellers,  Harvey  W., 

Fayette, 

Tennessee, 

Boy. 

208  Shepherd,  J.  L., 

Bastrop, 

Alabama. 

209  Shepherd,  William  M., 

Liberty, 

Virginia, 

M.D. 

210  Shipman,  John, 

Fort  Bend, 

Missouri, 

Lieutenant. 

211  Simons,  Joseph, 

Jackson, 

England. 

212  Sinniekson,  J.  J., 

Brazoria, 

New-Jersey, 

M.D. 

213  Smith,  Donald, 

Bastrop, 

Scotland. 

214  Smith,  Ezekiel, 

Gonzales, 

Virginia. 

215  Smith,  Joseph, 

Brazoria, 

Kentucky. 

216  Smith,  Robert, 

Fayette, 

Tennessee. 

217  Smith,  Thomas  S., 

Washington,  Maryland. 

218  St.  Clair,  Caleb, 

Gonzales, 

New- York. 

219  Stapp,  W.  P., 

Jackson, 

Missouri. 

220  Sullivan,  Daniel  C, 

Milam, 

Missouri. 

221  Sweizy,  John, 

Pennsylvania. 

222  Tanney,  John, 

Bastrop, 

Maryland. 

223  Tatum,  Thomas, 

Matagorda, 

Tennessee. 

224  Thompson,  J.  M.  N. 

Milam, 

Tennessee. 

225  Thompson,  Thomas  A., 

Milam, 

Kentucky. 

226  Thompson,  William, 

San  Patricio,  England. 

227  Thurmond,  Alfred  S., 

Victoria, 

Tennessee, 

Interpreter. 

228  Torrey,  James  N., 

Harris, 

Connecticut. 

229  Toops,  John, 

Washington 

,  Ohio. 

230  Towers,  Isaac, 

Victoria, 

New- York, 

M.D. 

231  Trehern,  G.  Washingtoi 

3,  Victoria, 

Mississippi. 

232  Turner,  Robert  W., 

Victoria, 

Ohio. 

233  Turnbull,  James, 

Victoria, 

Scotland. 

■ 

234  Urie,  James, 

Bastrop, 

South  Carolina. 

235  Usher,  Patrick, 

Jackson, 

Ireland. 

APPENDIX  NO.  I. 

No.               Names. 

Residence. 

Nativity. 

236  Vandyke,  Wilson  M., 

Jackson, 

Georgia. 

237  Van  Horn,  William  H., 

Victoria, 

New-YorK. 

238  Van  Vechten,  D.  H., 

Fayette, 

Kentucky. 

239  Walker,  Samuel  H., 

Galveston, 

Maryland. 

240  Wallace,  William  A., 

Bexar, 

Virginia. 

241  Waters,  Robert  G., 

Fort  Bend, 

South  Carolina. 

242  Watkins,  Joseph  D., 

Washington 

,  Louisiana. 

243  Weeks,  Henry  D., 

Victoria, 

New- York. 

244  Whaling,  Henry, 

Victoria, 

Indiana. 

245  White,  Calvin  C, 

Refugio, 

Vermont. 

246  White,  Francis, 

Galveston, 

Maryland. 

247  White,  James  S., 

Pennsylvania. 

248  Wilson,  James  C, 

Brazoria, 

England. 

249  Wilson,  William  F., 

Liberty, 

Virginia. 

250  Wilson,  Zaccheus, 

Montgomery,  Tennessee. 

251  Wilson, ,  (Irish), 

Montgomery,  Ireland. 

252  Williams,  Levi, 

Bastrop, 

Missouri. 

253  Willis,  0.  R., 

Tennessee. 

254  Willoughby,  Robert, 

Victoria, 

England. 

255  Wing,  M.  C, 

Travis, 

New-York. 

256  Woodland,  Henry, 

Harris, 

Indiana. 

257  Wright,  E.  D., 

Washington 

i,  North  Carolina. 

258  Wyatt,  J.  P., 

Fayette, 

Georgia. 

259  Wynn,  William, 

Montgomery,  Kentucky. 

260  Young,  James, 

Brazoria, 

New- York. 

261  Zumatt,  Isaac, 

Jackson, 

Missouri. 

443 


Remarks. 


A  List  of  Tezians  killed  at  the  Battle  of  Mier. 

1  Austin,  James.  6  Hopson,  William. 

2  Bassett, .  7  Jackson,  A. 

3  Berry,  Joseph.  8  Jones,  John  E. 

4  Dickson, .  9  Towers,  Isaac,  M.D. 

5  Hannom,  William  H.  10  White,  Calvin  C. 


Total,  10 


A  List  of  Texians  who  died  of  their  Wounds,  received  at  the  Battle  of  Mier. 

1  Bobo,  Lynn.  4  M'lllrea,  William  J. 

2  Kirkendall,  Hanks.  5  M'Kendall,  Alexander. 

3  Locherman,  Stanley.  6  Urie,  James.  Total,  6 


444  APPENDIX  NO.  I. 

A  List  of  Texians  who  fell  at  Salado  in  their  Attack  upon  the  Guards,  I'lth 
February,  1843. 

1  Brennem,  Richard  F.,  M.D.         4  Lyons,  Patrick. 

2  Fitzgerald,  Archibald.  5  Rice,  Lorenzo. 

3  Higgerson,  John.  Total,  5 
N.  B. — Fitzgerald  and  Higgerson  were  of  the  Bexar  prisoners,  taken 

by  General  Woll  in  September,  1842. 


A  List  of  Texians  decimated  and  shot  at  Salado  by  order  of  President  San- 
ta Anna,  on  March  %bth,  1843. 

1  Cash,  L.  L.  10  Roberts,  Charles. 

2  Cocke,  James  D.  11  Rowan,  William. 

3  Dunham,  Robert.  12  Shepherd,  J.  L. 

4  Eastland,  William  M.,  Captain.     13  Thompson,  J.  M.  N. 

5  Este,  Edward.  14  Torrey,  James  N. 

6  Harris,  Robert.  15  Turnbull,  James. 

7  Jones,  Thomas  L.  16  Whaling,  Henry. 

8  Mahan,  Patrick.  17  Wing,  M.  C. 

9  Ogden,  James.  Total  17 


April  25th,  1843. — Shot  by  order  of  President  Santa  Anna. 

Captain  Ewin  Cameron.  Total,  1 


A  List  of  Texians  who  died  in  the  Mountains  after  the  Break  at  Salado. 

1  Cody,  William  H.  4  Randolph,  Perry. 

2  Lewis,  A.  J.  5  Rice,  Sandford. 

3  Mitchell,  William.  Total,  5 


A  List  of  Texians  left  in  the  Mountains  after  the  Victory  of  Salado,  and 
supposed  to  be  Dead. 

1  Anderson,  George.  4  Morehead,  Jonathan. 

2  Bray,  F.  5  Nealy,  James  B.* 

3  Calvert,  John.*  Total,  5 


A  List  of  Texians  who  died  from  Suffering  and  Starvation  in  Mexico. 

1  Beard,  Robert.  7  Colville,  Thomas. 

2  Beard,  William.  8  Crawford,  Robert  M. 

3  Bennett,  Samuel  P.  9  Grosjean,  P.  C. 

4  Blanton,  John  B.  10  Hallowell,  Daniel  A. 

5  Bryant,  W.  B.  C.  11  Hill,  Charles. 

6  Burras,  A.  T.  12  Holderman,  Allen. 

*  Taken  upon  the  Rio  Grande  subsequently,  and  carried  to  Mexico. 


APPENDIX  NO.   I.  445 

13  Irvin,  John.  25  Saunders,  Leonidas. 

14  Kaughman,  E.  G.  26  Shipman,  John. 

15  Martin,  William.  27  Simons,  Joseph. 

16  Middleton,  Bemoni.  28  Smith,  Robert. 

17  Miller,  William.  29  Usher,  Patrick 

18  Miller,  William.  30  Van  Horn,  William  H. 

19  Morris,  William.  31  White,  James  S. 

20  M'Dade, .  32  Wilson,  Zaccheus. 

21  M'Lelland,  Samuel.  33  Willis,  0.  R. 

22  Owen,  John.  34  WTyatt,  J.  P. 

23  Porter,  Elisha.  35  One  other  not  remembered. 

24  Sargeant,  Carter.  Total,  35 

Aggregate  Number  of  Mier  men  Dead 84 


Released  by  President  Santa  Anna  through  the  Intercession  of  General  Wad- 
dy  Thompson,  United  States  Minister. 

1  Canfield,  Israel.*  5  Reese,  William. 

2  Crittenden,  Geo.  B.,  Lieutenant.  6  Sinnickson,  J.  J.,  M.D. 

3  Lusk,  P.  H.t  7  Waters,  Robert. 

4  Phelps,  Orlando  (by  Santa  Anna)  Total,  7 


Released  through  the  Intercession  of  H.  B.  MSs  Minister. 

1  Clarke,  Charles,  Lieutenant.        3  Murry,  Thomas  A.,  Adjutant. 

2  Lehan,  Jerry.  4  Smith,  Donald.  Total,  4 


Santa  Anna  having  adopted  the  Boy,  John  Hill,  released  his  Father  and 

Brother. 
1  Hill,  Asa.  2  Hill,  Jeffrey.  Total,  2 


Tezians  who  made  their  Escape  from  Mier  on  the  Evening  of  the  Capitulation. 
1  Chalk,  Winfield.  2  St.  Clair,  Caleb.  Total,  2 


Texians  who  were  left  Wounded  at  Mier,  and  who  effected  their  Escape. 

1  Beale,  Robert.  5  Mallen,  Nathan. 

2  Bideler,  John.  6  Rice,  James  0. 

3  Hays,  Lewis.  7  Ripley,  William. 

4  Piland,  George  W.  8  Weeks,  Henry  D.  Total,  8 

*  Released  by  request  of  John  Q.  Adams  and  Mahlon  Dickerson. 
t  Released  by  request  of  General  Jackson. 


446 


APPENDIX  NO.  I. 


Texians  who  effected  their  Escape  from  the  City  of  Mexico. 


1  Copeland,  Willis  (retaken). 

2  Crawford,  Robert  M. 

3  Dougherty,  Patrick. 

4  Fitzgerald,  John. 

5  Gattis,  D.  H. 


6  Morgan,  John. 

7  Thompson,  William. 

8  Walker,  Samuel  H. 

9  Wilson,  James  C. 


Total,  9 


Those  who  effected  their  Escape  from  the  Mountains  after  the  Victory  of  Sa- 
lado,  and  arrived  safely  in  Texas. 

1  Alexander,  John  R.  3  Cox,  Thomas  W.,  Lieutenant. 

2  Blackburn,  John.  4  Oldham,  William.         Total,  4 


Those  who  escaped  from  the  Castle  of  Perote,  July  2d,  1843. 

1  Green,  Thomas  J.  3  Reese,  Charles  K. 

2  Henrie,  Daniel  Drake.  Total,  3 

Total  number  of  Texians  killed,  starved,  escaped,  and  released,  125 
Of  the  Mier  Command,  remaining  in  Mexico  up  to  last  advices,   136 


Total 


261 


The  following  Detail,  as  a  Camp  Guard,  was  left  upon  the  East  Side  of  the 
Rio  Grande  on  the  25th  December,  1842,  and  ivho  retreated  into  Texas. 
Captain  Buster's  Company. 


1  HackstafF, . 

2  Hensley,  William. 

3  Hicks, . 

4  Hyde,  A.  C,  Orderly  Sergeant. 

5  M'Quin,  Major. 

6  Ransom,  Thomas. 

7  Smith,  Gabriel. 

8  Turner, . 

9  Vanham, . 

10  Watson,  Doctor. 

11  Wilkerson,  Warren,  First  Lieu- 


tenant. 
Captain  Cameron's 

1  Canty,  John. 

2  Donnall,  — -. 

3  Earnest, . 

4  Ward,  William. 

5  Yates,  A.  J. 


Total,  11 

Company. 


Total,  5 


Captain  Eastland's  Company. 

1  Alley,  George  W. 

2  Ambrose,  M. 

3  Bissell,  Theodore. 

4  Buckman,  Oliver. 

5  Clark, . 

6  Holton,  W.  S. 

7  Hudson,  David. 

8  Marlow,  Edward. 

9  Vincent,  E.  A.  Total,  9 

Captain  Ryan's  Company. 

1  Brown,  Edward. 

2  Buckhannan,  J. 

3  Dresser,  William  E. 

4  Gilpin,  Ralph. 

5  Kirkendall,  Moses. 

6  Lucas,  Z. 

7  One  other  not  remembered. 

Total,  7 


APPENDIX  NO.    I.  447 

Captain  Reese's  Company.  Captain  Pearson's  Company. 

1  Calder,  Sidney.  1  Oldham,  Thomas. 

2  Hancock,  F.  2  Owens, . 

3  Phelps,  Virgil.  3  Smith,  George.  Total,  3 

4  Walton,  George.  j  Bonnel?  George  w  ?  First  Lieu. 

5  Warren,  Thomas.  tenant  of  the  Flotilla>* 


6  West,  Gilford.  Total,  6 


Total,  1 
Total  .        .        .      -  .        .        .42 


Of  the  Sixty-seven  Bexar  Prisoners  captured  by  General  Woll  in  Septem- 
ber, 1842,  and  carried  into  Mexico,  the  following  made  their  Escape  from 
the  Castle  of  Perote,  July  2d,  1842. 

1  Barclay,  Richard.  4  Forrester,  John. 

2  Cornegay,  R.  5  Toowig,  John. 

3  Dalrymple,  John,  who  succeeded  Total,  5 

in  reaching  Texas. 


Those  who  made  their  Escape  from  the  Castle  at  the  same  time,  but  were  re- 
captured. 

1  Allen,  Isaac.  5  Hancock,  Thomas. 

2  Beck,  T.  B.  6  Ogden,  D.  C. 

3  Davis,  D.  J.  7  Stone,  Samuel  C. 

4  Elley,  Augustus.  8  Young,  John. 


Released  by  Santa  Anna. 
1  Robinson,  James  H.  (Lawyer  Robinson,  his  Commissioner).  Total,  1 


Released  through  the  Intercession  of  General  Waddy  Thompson,  the  United 
States  Minister. 

1  Hutchinson,  Judge.  3  Maverick,  S.  H. 

2  Jones,  William  E.  Total,  3 


Released  through  the  Intercession  of  General  Andrew  Jackson. 
1  Bradley,  John.  Total,  1 


Killed  at  Salado,  February  11th,  1843. 
1  Fitzgerald,  Archibald.  2  Higgerson,  John.  Total,  2 

*  It  has  already  been  explained  how  Major  Bonnel,  Doctor  Watson,  and  Private  Hack- 
staff  came  to  be  left  at  the  Camp. 


448  APPENDIX    NO.  I. 

Those  who  died  in  Prison  in  Mexico. 

1  Booker,  Shields,  M.D.  5  Jackson, . 

2  Crews,  • .  6  Trapnell,  John. 

3  Cunningham, .  7  Trimble  (Tecolote). 

4  Grey,  French  S.  8  Woods,  Norman.  Total,  8 


Those  who  escaped  from  Mexico. 

1  Hatch,  George.  3  Neal, . 

2  Morgan, .  Total,  3 


General  Waddy  Thompson,  the  United  States  Minister,  upon  leaving  Mexi- 
co, procured  the  Liberation  of  the  following,  being  the  Remainder  of  the 
Bexar  Prisoners  alive,  with  the  exception  of  George  Van  Ness,  who  was  a 
Santa  Fe  Prisoner. 

1  Alsbarry,  A.  H.  19  Man  ton,  Edward. 

2  Allen,  Isaac.  20  Monell,  A.  H. 

3  Beck,  T.  B.  21  Morgan,  J.  C. 

4  Brown,  Edward.  22  M'Kay,  Francis. 

5  Brown,  James  H.  23  Neighbours,  R.  C. 

6  Bugg,  William.  24  Nobles,  S.  L. 

7  Colquhoun,  Lodovic.  25  Ogden,  D.  C. 

8  Davis,  D.  J.  26  Perry,  John. 

9  Elley,  Augustus.  27  Peterson,  C.  W. 

10  Faison,  Nathaniel.  28  Raper,  M.  L.  B. 

11  Glenn,  Simeon.  29  Robinson,  Joseph. 

12  Hancock,  Thomas.  30  Schaffer,  George. 

13  Herbert,  Nathaniel.  31  Shaw,  Joseph. 

14  Hurrell,  M.  32  Smith,  John. 

15  Johnson,  Chauncey.  33  Stone,  Samuel  C. 

16  Lehman,  John.  34  Trueheart,  James  L. 

17  Leslie,  A.  J.  35  Voss,  J.  G.  A. 

18  Lee,  John.  36  Young,  John.  Total,  36 


1  Novell,  Samuel,  previously,  and,  2  Van  Ness,  George,  subsequently, 
released.  Total,  2 

Total 61 

We  have  no  knowledge  of  the  six  remaining  Bexar  prisoners,  but  pre- 
sume they  have  perished  with  their  companions. 

The  patriotic  Antonio  Navarro,  one  of  the  Santa  Fe  prisoners,  who  was 
confined  in  the  Accordada,  the  most  loathsome  and  infamous  prison  in  Mex- 


APPENDIX    NO.   I. 


449 


ico,  where  he,  for  more  than  two  years,  suffered  more  than  the  horrors 
of  death,  has  been  lately  sent  to  the  Castle  of  San  Juan  d'Ulloa,  where 
the  humanity  of  the  "  magnanimous"  nation  has  consigned  him  to  the 

Vomita.* 


The  Places  of  Nativity  and  Residence  of  those  engaged  in  the  Battle  of  . 

Mier, 

December  25th  and  26th,  1842. 

Resid 

mce. 

Nos. 

Residence. 

Nos. 

Austin        County, 

Texas, 

4 

Alabama,           United  States, 

10 

Bastrop 

" 

" 

18 

Connecticut, 

it 

3 

Bexar 

it 

a 

5 

Georgia, 

a 

17 

Brazoria 

" 

-ti 

18 

Illinois, 

a 

4 

Brazos 

tt 

it 

1 

Indiana, 

u 

5 

Colorado 

" 

ii 

1 

Kentucky, 

it 

28 

Fayette 

" 

" 

15 

Louisiana, 

a 

4 

Fort  Bend 

it 

tt 

28 

Maryland, 

" 

7 

Galveston 

tt 

ii 

4 

Massachusetts, 

" 

3 

Gonzales 

tt 

ii 

6 

Mississippi, 

ti 

4 

Harris 

tt 

ii 

17 

Missouri, 

a 

13 

Harrison 

tt 

ii 

1 

New-Jersey, 

a 

2 

Jackson 

it 

ii 

12 

New- York, 

a 

21 

Liberty 

" 

ii 

9 

North  Carolina, 

« 

10 

Matagorda 

" 

u 

3 

Ohio, 

a 

8 

Milam 

ti 

" 

17 

Pennsylvania, 

a 

13 

Montgomery 

tt 

a 

14 

South  Carolina, 

a 

8 

Nacogdoches 

(( 

a 

1 

Tennessee, 

" 

42 

Refugio 

(( 

a 

2 

Vermont, 

<( 

2 

Sabine 

a 

" 

1 

Virginia, 

a 

14 

San  Patricio 

" 

tt 

1 

District  of  Columbia, 

" 

1 

Travis 
Victoria 

a 

tt 
ti 

8 
35 

Number  from  the  United  States,  219 

Washington 
Not  claiming 

ti                It 

residence 

23 
.       17 

England,  \ 

Ireland,       _     ,.  , 

,    >Englishsubiects,  34 
Scotland,  [ 

f; 

Total 

. 

,     261 

Canada,    J 

u 

France  . 

1 

Germany 

4 

Nativity  not  known 

3 

Total 


261 


*  During  the  State  Revolution  in  Mexico,  Colonel  Navarro  escaped  from  the  Castle  of 
San  Juan  d'Ulloa,  and  has  safely  arrived  in  Texas,  where  he  was  met  by  the  wannest  con- 
gratulations of  his  friends  and  countrymen. 

3M 


450  APPENDIX   N(X   II. 

The  following  Mier  Prisoners  made  their  Escape  from  the  Castle  of  Perote 
on  the  25th  of  March,  1844.  The  first  Nine  upon  the  List  reached  their 
Homes  in  safety,  and  the  remaining  Seven  were  recaptured. 

1  Arthur,  Francis.  9  Laforge,  A.  B. 

2  Frensley,  William  H.  10  Moore,  William. 

3  Gleason,  Cyrus  K.  11  Runyan,  William  T. 

4  Goodman,  Stephen.  12  Smith,  T. 

5  Johnson,  John.  13  Tanney,  John. 

6  Jones,  Wiley.  14  Toops,  John. 

7  Kean,  Richard.  15  Wright,  E.  D. 

8  Kean,  Edward.  16  Wynn,  William.  Total,  16 


No.  II. 

The  following  correspondence,  published  soon  after  the  return  of  the 
author  from  Mexico,  will  speak  for  itself,  and  satisfy  every  one  who  will 
take  the  pains  to  examine  it  of  the  infamous  agency  President  Houston 
had  in  the  murder  of  our  countrymen  in  Mexico  : 

'  To  the  People  of  Texas, — However  unpleasant  it  may  be  to  appear 
before  you  through  the  columns  of  a  newspaper,  it  is  a  matter  in  which  I 
have  at  present  no  choice.  The  President  of  your  Republic  on  the  one 
hand,  and  your  countrymen  now  in  chains,  and  the  most  odious  slavery 
in  Mexico  on  the  other,  are  the  parties  at  issue.  I,  more  fortunate  than 
they,  favoured  by  an  all- wise  Providence,  and  an  energy  befitting  the  fear- 
ful task,  with  some  few  of  my  comrades,  escaped  through  the  walls  of 
Perote  some  weeks  since.  A  solemn  duty  I  owe  myself,  my  unfortunate 
fellow-prisoners,  and  my  country,  demands  of  me,  with  the  evidences  in 
my  possession,  to  disabuse  the  public  mind  in  what  has  been  affirmed  on 
one  hand,  and  unblushingly  denied  by  President  Houston  and  his  parti- 
sans on  the  other,  to  wit :  '  That  he  wrote,  or  caused  to  be  written,  to 
Mexico,  by  Captain  Charles  Elliott,  her  Britannic  majesty's  charge  d'af- 
faires at  Galveston,  that  the  Mier  prisoners  had  entered  Mexico  contrary  to 
law  and  authority.'' 

"  Whatever  may  have  been  the  ostensible  pretext  of  General  Houston's 
communication — and  he  pretends  to  ask  mercy  for  his  countrymen— yet 
his  high  authority  that  the  Mier  men  had  entered  Mexico  contrary  to  law 
and  authority  furnished  the  tyrant  of  that  country  all  the  legal  pretext  he 
could  have  desired  in  slaking  his  bloodthirsty  vengeance  upon  the  citi- 
zens of  our  country.  It  would,  indeed,  be  an  unjust  denial  of  that  per- 
sonal and  political  acumen  which  General  Houston's  friends  claim  for 


APPENDIX    NO.    II.  451 

him,  to  say  that  he  could  not  foresee  the  consequences  of  that  communi- 
cation. The  murder  of  our  twenty-seven  countrymen  at  Tampico,  of 
Colonel  Fannin  and  his  brave  four  hundred,  of  many  of  the  Santa  Fe  pris- 
oners, and  a  thousand  other  acts  of  savage  cruelty  inflicted  upon  us  du- 
ring this  war  by  Mexico,  all  too  plainly  told  General  Houston  that  his  ask- 
ing '  mercy  for  the  Mier  men'  would  not  weigh  a  feather  in  the  balance 
against  Santa  Anna's  cold-blooded  vindictiveness,  after  he  (Houston)  had 
in  effect  pronounced  them  brigands  and  marauders  upon  Mexico.  One 
year  previous  to  the  battle  of  Mier  the  bloody  tyrant  had  published  a  de- 
cree '  that  in  future  the  war  with  Texas  should  be  conducted  upon  the 
principles  of  civilized  warfare,'  and  the  Mier  men,  under  their  articles  of 
capitulation,  were  guaranteed  in  a  full  observance  of  this  decree.  It  was 
necessary,  then,  before  he  could  once  more,  in  the  face  of  these  solemn 
guarantees  and  the  civilized  world,  dip  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  your 
countrymen,  to  have  some  legal  pretext  for  so  doing.  General  Houston 
furnished  him  that  pretext,  and  the  murder  of  the  brave  Cameron,  Cocke, 
Dunham,  Ogden,  Eastland,  Jones,  and  their  comrades  in  death,  is  the  con- 
sequence, and  their  blood  is  upon  his  head. 

"  While  myself  and  companions  were  incarcerated  in  the  vilest  dun- 
geon in  Mexico,  and  had  no  power  of  speaking  upon  this  subject,  General 
Houston  and  his  partisans  boldly  denied  the  charge,  and  referred  exult- 
ingly  to  the  secretary  of  state's  letter,  published  in  June,  to  the  Hon. 
Ashbel  Smith,  our  minister  in  London.  One  word  of  this  letter — where- 
fore put  it  off  from  the  battle  of  Mier  in  December  up  to  June  1  All  the 
evils  which  it  sought  to  remedy  was  of  six  months'  standing.  From  the 
date  of  our  inglorious  surrender  at  Mier  on  the  26th  of  December,  up  to 
the  middle  of  March,  we  had  been  treated  with  all  the  consideration 
which  our  articles  of  capitulation  guarantied  ;  then  comes  this  '  merci- 
ful' death-warrant  of  General  Houston.  Santa  Anna  forthwith  orders 
General  Mexier,  Governor  of  Cohuilla,  to  shoot  the  whole  of  our  prison- 
ers in  his  charge,  numbering  one  hundred  and  seventy  odd.  This  brave 
soldier  refused  positively  so  to  do  ;  and  three  days  after,  the  order, 
through  the  influence  of  the  foreign  ministers,  was  countermanded.  Gov- 
ernor Mexier  was  then  ordered  to  decimate  them,  which  he  also  refused 
to  do,  for  which  he  was  broke  of  his  commission,  and  banished  the  coun- 
try ;  when  a  murderous  wretch  was  specially  charged  with  the  execution 
of  this  horrible  black  bean  lottery,  and  thus  fell  those  brave  men,  who  had 
so  often  staked  their  lives  in  defence  of  your  liberty.  After  this  most  un- 
just and  infamous  butchery,  which  was  on  the  25th  of  March,  the  balance 
of  the  Mier  men  were  still  in  the  most  imminent  peril.  On  the  25th 
of  April,  the  brave  and  lamented  Cameron  was  taken  out  and  shot 
without  any  cause  being  given.    Immediately,  however,  after  the  first 


452  APPENDIX    NO.    II. 

order  for  shooting  our  men  had  gone  forth,  we  lost  no  time  in  writing 
home  for  evidences  of  General  Houston's  falsehood.  They  were  fur- 
nished by  the  bushel.  Among  these  were  his  ridiculous  and  bombastic 
newspaper  gasconade,  in  answer  to  Santa  Anna's  letter  to  General  Ham- 
ilton— his  numerous  war  proclamations — his  bloody  war  speeches  at  Gal- 
veston and  elsewhere — his  proclamation  of  the  16th  of  September,  1842, 
calling  upon  all  of  the  first  class  of  militia  of  the  counties  west  of  the 
Trinity,  and  under  which  proclamation  we  came  out,  and  in  which  he  au- 
thorized the  men  to  '  call  to  their  lead  a,  man  of  wisdom,  valour,  and  experi- 
ence^ and  '  -pursue  the  enemy  into  Mexico,  and  chastise  him  for  his  insolence 
and  wrongs'  Also  the  law  of  Texas  of  January,  1840,  authorizing  us  to 
elect  our  commander,  and  last,  though  not  least,  the  Constitution  of  your 
country,  by  which  foreigners,  at  least,  are  taught  to  believe  that  President 
Houston's  dictum  is  not  superior  to  that  sacred  instrument.  These  were 
the  evidences  which  General  Thompson  so  humanely  alludes  to  in  his  let- 
ter of  the  10th  of  June,  to  his  Excellency  Mr.  Doyle,  and  which  armed 
him  so  completely  against  the  machinations  of  your  President  and  the 
bloodthirsty  vengeance  of  his  friend  Santa  Anna. 

"  Feeling  now  that  the  last  blood  had  flowed  which  it  was  in  the  power 
of  General  Houston's  vindictiveness  to  the  Mier  command  to  shed,  and 
many  of  my  prison  companions  looking  to  me  to  vindicate  them  against 
the  foul  aspersions  of  their  unjust  President,  on  the  29th  of  May  I  wrote 
to  General  Thompson  to  preserve  me  a  copy  of  the  letter  which  General 
Houston  had  caused  to  be  written  to  Mexico.  In  doing  so,  I  felt  a  duty 
more  weighty,  and  far  more  sacred,  than  any  obligation  to  the  living. 
The  honest  reputation  of  the  dead  was  the  only  legacy  bequeathed  by 
these  murdered  heroes  to  their  mourning  friends  and  destitute  wives  and 
children  :  that  I  shall  be  in  any  way  instrumental  in  perpetuating  the  rec- 
ord that  their  husbands  and  fathers  did  not  die  robbers,  as  President 
Houston  pronounced  them,  will  be  to  me  a  lasting  gratification  ;  while  to 
them,  in  long  years  to  come,  they  may  look  back  upon  the  fact  as  their 
proudest  recollection,  that  the  traducer  of  the  dead  was  proved  their 
slanderer  and  murderer. 

"  Can  it  be  possible  that  President  Houston  has  a  friend  so  blinded  in 
his  party  zeal  as  not  to  know  that  Commodore  Moore  and  the  whole  of 
his  crew  would  have  been  shot,  had  they  by  any  chance  of  war  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  Mexicans,  after  President  Houston's  proclamation 
of  piracy  against  him  1  yet  the  Mier  case  is  one  point,  with  this  difference, 
that  they  were  already  in  the  hands  of  the  Mexicans,  and  it  suited  Gen- 
eral Houston's  policy  to  have  them  killed  off  more  secretly,  and  under 
-ome  pretence  of  mercy. 

"My  letter  to  General  Thompson  of  the  29th  of  May,  above  alluded  to, 


APPENDIX    NO.  II.  453 

produced  the  following  correspondence  between  him  and  the  Hon.  Mr. 
Doyle  (letters  numbered  1,  2,  3,  4),  and  from  General  Thompson  to  my- 
self (numbered  5  and  6).  By  this  correspondence  it  will  be  seen  that  I 
am  first  referred  to  the  author  of  the  letter  for  a  copy,  and  in  the  event 
of  refusal,  then  General  Thompson  promises  his  statement  of  its  contents. 
Upon  my  arrival  in  Galveston,  I  addressed  letter  No.  7  to  Captain  Elliott. 
His  answer,  No.  8,  shows  his  refusal  to  furnish  said  letter,  which  brought 
forth  my  reply,  No.  9.  I  should  then  have  applied  to  President  Houston 
for  the  copy  in  question,  but  Mr.  S.  H.  Walker,  one  of  my  fellow-prison- 
ers lately  escaped  from  Mexico,  having  applied  to  General  Houston  for 
the  same,  received  General  Houston's  verbal  denial  of  the  existence  of 
such  letter.  This  correspondence  will  show  that  Captain  Elliott,  Mr. 
Doyle,  General  Thompson — all,  except  your  President,  are  too  honourable 
to  deny  the  existence  of  the  letter,  and  he  does  it  with  the  same  unblush- 
ing hardihood  which  has  caused  him  to  deny  a  thousand  things  he  has  ut- 
tered. Vice  and  crime  delight  in  darkness,  and  General  Houston  may 
have  supposed  that  his  blunt  denial  would  stop  all  inquiry  upon  the  sub- 
ject, but  in  this  he  adds  moral  turpitude  to  heinous  guilt,  and  therefore 
deserves  the  more  the  execrations  of  his  countrymen. 

"  Fellow-citizens,  well  may  you  ponder  upon  the  political  condition  of 
your  country,  and  some  seek  refuge  in  acknowledging  the  supremacy  of 
degraded  Mexico,  some  in  abolition,  some  in  annexation,  when  such 
things  are  allowed.  What  a  commentary  upon  our  government !  If  the 
poorest  man  were  to  commit  murder  upon  his  neighbour,  he  would  be 
hanged  therefor ;  but  President  Houston,  in  the  unchecked  practice  of 
every  political  enormity,  can  do  so  by  the  regiment  and  fleet  without 
punishment.     I  am,  very  respectfully,  your  old  friend, 

"  Thomas  J.  Green. 

"  November  10th,  1845." 

(No.  1.) 

Mexico,  June  8th,  1843. 
My  dear  Sir, — I  send  you  herewith  a  letter  recently  received  from 
General  T.  J.  Green,  of  Texas,  and  shall  be  obliged  to  you  for  an  extract 
of  that  portion  of  the  letter  of  Mr.  Elliott  to  Mr.  Packenham  to  which 
General  Green  alludes.  I  deem  it  proper  to  add,  that  although  the  com- 
munications made  to  me  of  the  contents  of  Captain  Elliott's,  either  by 
Mr.  Packenham  or  yourself,  were  not  of  a  confidential  character,  nor  did 
I  consider  that  any  such  confidence  was  implied,  yet  I  neither  made  any 
communication  on  the  subject  to  General  Green,  nor  authorized  any  one 
else  to  do  so.     I  am,  &c,  &c,  &c, 

(Signed),  Waddy  Thompson. 

Hon.  Percy  W.  Doyle. 


454  APPENDIX    NO.   II. 

(No.  2.) 

Mexico,  June  9th,  1843. 

My  clear  General, — I  beg  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
yesterday's  date,  enclosing  one  you  had  received  from  General  T.  J. 
Green,  of  Texas,  and  requesting  me  to  give  you  an  extract  of  a  letter 
written  by  Captain  Elliott,  her  majesty's  charge  de  affaires  in  Texas,  to 
Mr.  Packenham  on  the  subject  of  the  Texian  prisoners.  I  regret  to  be 
obliged  to  refuse  the  request  you  make,  for  the  letter  is  a  private  one,  and 
not  addressed  to  me  ;  I  therefore  do  not  feel  authorized  to  give  any  ex- 
tract from  it.  With  respect  to  the  communication  made  to  you  by  Mr. 
Packenham,  I  cannot,  of  course,  know  how  far  it  was  looked  upon  as 
confidential  by  him,  but  I  am  led  to  suppose  that,  in  saying  what  he  did, 
he  was  actuated  by  the  same  feelings  as  myself,  when  I  spoke  to  you  on 
the  same  subject,  namely,  that  any  communication  I  made  to  you  was 
certainly  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  each  other  in  any  steps  we  might  be 
induced  to  take  for  the  benefit  of  those  unfortunate  prisoners,  but  certain- 
ly not  to  be  communicated  to  any  one  else,  and  especially  not  to  them.  I 
much  fear  that  this  knowledge  they  have  obtained,  as  you  observe,  unau- 
thorized by  you,  may  be  the  means  of  doing  them  farther  injury. 

I  am,  &c,  &c,  &c,  Percy  W.  Doyle. 

General  Waddy  Thompson. 

(No.  3.) 

Mexico,  June  10th,  1843. 
My  dear  Sir, — I  have  received  your  note  of  yesterday,  and  regret  that 
you  should  not  feel  yourself  at  liberty  to  give  me  the  extract  from  the 
letter  of  Mr.  Elliott  to  Mr.  Packenham  for  which  I  asked.  I  should  not 
have  considered  it  necessary  to  say  anything  more  on  the  subject  but  for 
the  remark  which  you  make  as  to  the  communications  which  were  made 
to  me  having  been  regarded  as  confidential :  if  so,  and  I  have  spoken  to 
any  one  of  them.  I  have  been  in  fault ;  and  as  I  do  not  so  consider  it,  I 
feel  it  to  be  my  duty  to  say,  that  neither  by  Mr.  Packenham  nor  yourself 
was  any  intimation  given  to  me  that  the  communication  was  to  be  so  re- 
garded, and  I  cannot  see  anything  in  the  nature  of  the  communication  it- 
self which  in  any  degree  implied  such  confidence.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  im- 
agine how  it  could  have  aided  us,  in  the  protection  of  the  prisoners  of 
Mier,  to  have  known  that  they  were  brigands  and  not  prisoners  of  war, 
and  therefore  not  entitled  to  our  protection.  If  such  was  the  case,  it 
was  proper  that  it  should  be  known  ;  if  it  was  not,  and  there  was  some 
mistake  about  the  matter,  it  was  due  to  those  unfortunate  men,  whose 
lives  were  in  jeopardy,  that  this  mistake  should  be  corrected,  and  not  less 
so  to  me,  who  had  interfered  in  my  official  character,  and  said  to  the  min- 
ister of  foreign  relations  in  strong,  but  altogether  respectful  language,  that 


APPENDIX    NO.    II.  455 

my  government  would  expect  that  all  the  privileges  of  prisoners  of  war 
would  be  extended  to  them ;  and  although  I  made  no  communication  on 
the  subject  to  the  prisoners,  I  rejoice  to  know  that  the  fact  of  my  having 
mentioned  the  subject  to  others,  by  whom  it  was  communicated  to  them, 
has  been  the  means  of  furnishing  me  with  the  most  conclusive  evidence 
that  the  expedition  was  authorized  by  the  Texas  government ;  that  the 
officers  were  appointed  by  that  government,  and  express  orders  given  to 
cross  the  Rio  Grande  ;  and  that,  therefore,  these  men  were  entitled  to  all 
the  rights  of  prisoners  of  war.  But  as  you  seem  to  regard  the  commu- 
nication made  to  me  as  of  a  confidential  character,  I  shall  make  no  state- 
ment on  the  subject  for  the  present.  It  is  in  the  power  of  President 
Houston  or  Captain  Elliott  to  cause  the  letter  of  the  latter  to  Mr.  Pack- 
enham  to  be  published,  which  I  hope  will  be  promptly  done.  If  it  should 
not  be,  or  if,  when  published,  it  does  not  correspond  with  the  communi- 
cation made  to  me  of  its  contents,  I  shall  feel  bound  to  state  what  these 
communications  were.     I  am,  &c,  &c,  &c, 

(Signed),  Waddy  Thompson. 

Hon.  Percy  W.  Doyle. 

(No.  4.) 

Mexico,  June  11th,  1843. 
My  dear  General, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 
your  letter  of  yesterday's  date. 

My  object  in  making  the  observations  I  did  in  that  letter  was  simply 
that  you  might  be  made  aware  of  the  light  in  which  I  wished  the  com- 
munications I  made  to  you,  or  any  other  connected  with  the  business  of 
our  respective  missions,  should  be  considered.     I  am,  &c,  &c,  &c, 

(Signed),  Percy  W.  Doyle. 

General  Waddy  Thompson. 

(No.  5.) 

Mexico,  June  13th,  1843. 
To  General  T.  J.  Green  : 

Sir, — I  beg  leave  to  present  to  you  the  enclosed  copy  of  correspond- 
ence between  Mr.  Percy  W.  Doyle,  the  British  charge  d'affaires,  and 
myself,  upon  the  subject  of  your  letter  of  the  29th  of  May.  I  trust  you 
will  be  satisfied  that,  upon  the  footing  on  which  Mr.  Doyle  has  placed  the 
matter,  it  would  be  improper  for  me  to  say  more  at  present. 
Very  respectfully,  &c,  &c, 

(Signed),  Waddy  Thompson. 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  another  letter  from  General  Thomp- 
son to  General  Green,  also  dated  13th  June,  1843 : 


456  APPENDIX    NO.    II. 

You  can  very  distinctly  see  by  my  notes  to  Mr.  Doyle  what  my  state- 
ment will  be. 

(No.  7.) 

Galveston,  Nov.  6th,  1843. 
To  his  Excellency  Charles  Elliott,  H.  B.  M. 
Charge  d'Affaires  for  Texas. 
Sir, — Feeling  a  deep  interest  in  the  fate  of  my  late  fellow-prisoners,  and 
that  it  is  a  duty  I  owe  my  country  that  the  causes  which  led  to  the  foul 
murder  of  a  portion  of  them,  under  the  order  of  President  Santa  Anna, 
should  be  known,  and  believing  that  their  massacre  was  the  result  of  the 
correspondence  of  President  Houston  with  your  excellency,  which  was 
forwarded  by  you  to  Mr.  Packenham,  I  respectfully  ask  a  copy  of  General 
Houston's  letter  to  you,  and  of  yours  to  Mr.  Packenham. 

You  will  see  from  the  enclosed  copy  of  correspondence  between  Gen- 
eral Thompson  and  Mr.  Doyle,  that  the  contingency  upon  which  I  am  au- 
thorized to  make  General  Thompson's  statement  public  is  the  failure  to 
procure  those  letters.     I  am,  very  respectfully,  your  ob't  serv't, 

(Signed),  Thomas  J.  Green. 

(No.  8.) 

Galveston,  Nov.  7th,  1843. 
Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  your  letter  of  the  6th  instant, 
and,  as  a  general  rule,  I  must  decline  to  furnish  you  with  copies  of  any 
correspondence  between  other  persons  and  myself.     I  have  the  honour  to 
remain,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

(Signed),  Charles  Elliott. 

General  Thomas  J.  Green. 

(No.  9.) 

Galveston,  Nov.  8th,  1843. 
To  his  Excellency  Charles  Elliott,  H.  B.  M.  ) 
Charge  d'Affaires  for  Texas.  > 

Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  your  note  of  yesterday  in  an- 
swer to  mine  of  the  6th  instant,  and  can  readily  allow,  as  a  "general  rule,''' 
the  propriety  of  your  not  furnishing  copies  of  your  correspondence  ;  but 
the  correspondence  I  requested  was  of  such  an  extraordinary  character, 
I  cannot  believe  it  should  come  under  such  "  general  rule.''''  Your  excel- 
lency, therefore,  will  allow  me  most  respectfully  to  state  more  at  length 
the  reasons  of  that  application. 

Upon  the  arrival  of  myself  and  companions  at  Tacubaya,  near  the  city 
of  Mexico,  about  the  15th  of  March  last,  we  were  several  times  informed 
by  gentlemen  who  had  it  direct  from  General  Thompson,  the  United 


APPENDIX    NO.    II.  457 

States  minister  near  that  court,  that  you  had,  at  the  request  of  President 
Houston,  written  to  H.  B.  M.  minister,  Mr.  Packenham,  to  this  purport, 
"that  though  the  Mier  prisoners  had  entered  Mexico  contrary  to  law  and  au- 
thority, yet  he,  Houston,  begged  mercy  for  them,'''  &c. 

The  high  authority  of  President  Houston,  that  the  Mier  prisoners  were 
brigands,  endorsed  by  the  still  higher  authority  of  her  Britannic  majesty's 
charge  d'affaires  residing  at  their  homes,  gave  the  President  of  Mexico 
all  the  legal  right  he  desired  to  shoot  them.  The  whole  history  of  our 
war  shows  that  he  could  desire  nothing  more  than  such  legal  pretext  to 
execute  upon  Texians  the  bloodiest  vengeance.  We  had  been  prisoners 
of  war  from  the  26th  of  December  up  to  the  middle  of  March,  and  under 
our  articles  of  capitulation  had  been  treated  as  such.  Then  comes,  to 
say  the  least  of  it,  your  unfortunate  letter,  which  took  from  us  all  protec- 
tion of  that  capitulation,  which  legalized  our  murders,  and  proved  a  death- 
warrant  to  the  whole  of  my  brave  companions.  Most  fortunately  for 
them,  three  days  after  the  bloody  order  had  gone  into  the  hands  of  a  sol- 
dier too  just  and  too  brave  to  execute  it,  the  remonstrance  of  the  foreign 
ministers  got  it  countermanded ;  but  still,  their  influence  could  not  pre- 
vent the  execution  of  your  countryman,  the  brave  Cameron,  and  his  sev- 
enteen companions.  Justice  to  the  memory  of  these  brave  spirits  and. 
their  destitute  wives  and  children  calls  loudly  upon  me  to  place  their  mur- 
der where  it  rightly  belongs.  With  this  view,  before  leaving  Perote,  I 
wrote  to  the  American  minister  near  Mexico  to  procure  me  a  copy  of 
your  letter  from  Mr.  Doyle,  H.  B.  M.  minister,  who  succeeded  Mr.  Pack- 
enham, which  correspondence  I  had  the  honour  of  enclosing  to  your  ex- 
cellency yesterday. 

It  is  not  my  desire  to  criminate  your  excellency  with  a  foreknowledge 
of  the  consequences  of  this  unfortunate  letter;  of  your  humanity  I  have 
a  more  exalted  opinion ;  but  when  your  excellency  has  been  made  the  un- 
witting instrument  of  communication  by  which  this  melancholy,  bloody, 
hellish  tragedy  has  been  perpetrated  upon  the  best  men  of  our  country, 
justice,  both  to  yourself  and  government,  requires  that  the  whole  truth 
should  be  told,  and  the  blame  rest  upon  the  head  of  him  who  projected  it. 
Your  excellency  has  been  sufficiently  unfortunate  in  being  the  innocent 
medium  of  this  fell  execution,  and  its  cruel  author,  the  least  of  all  men, 
deserves  screening  at  your  hands  by  the  suppression  of  the  least  portion 
of  the  truth  ;  and  I  have  yet  to  learn  how  such  suppression  can  promote 
the  ends  of  justice.  I  must  be  allowed  the  opinion,  that  whatever  rule  of 
diplomacy  governs  your  official  station,  you  have  no  right  to  hold  any- 
thing as  private  to  myself  or  companions  which  affect  our  lives  or  liberty 
Very  respectfully,  your  excellency's  obedient  servant, 

Thomas  J.   Green 

3N 


458  APPENDIX    NO.    II. 

Having  failed  to  procure  a  copy  of  the  letter  in  question,  either  from 
Captain  Elliott  or  President  Houston,  to  whom  I  was  referred  by  General 
Thompson,  I  applied  to  him  for  a  statement  of  its  contents,  which  the  fol- 
lowing correspondence  will  explain,  and  which  was  soon  after  published 
in  Texas. 

"  To  the  Public. 

"  Duty  to  our  brave  and  unfortunate  countrymen  in  the  dungeons  of 
Mexico  caused  me  to  lay  before  the  public,  some  months  since,  the  cor- 
respondence between  the  United  States  and  English  ministers  in  that 
country,  relative  to  the  letter  which  General  Houston  had  written  to 
Mexico,  denouncing  the  Mier  prisoners  as  brigands,  and  which  caused 
their  decimation  and  subsequent  suffering.  No  honest  man,  even  of  the 
most  blinded  partisans  of  President  Houston,  who  read  that  correspond- 
ence, doubted  for  a  moment  the  statement  of  the  facts  therein  set  forth, 
though  President  Houston  and  his  forces  in  Texas  had  for  months  pre- 
vious to  that  time  denied  most  solemnly  that  he  had  ever  written  or 
caused  to  be  written  such  a  letter  to  Mexico.  As  soon  as  he  found  that 
I  had  returned  from  that  country,  armed  with  the  proofs  of  his  bloody 
murder  of  our  countrymen,  he,  in  his  speech  in  the  Presbyterian  Church 
at  Houston,  in  November,  for  the  first  time  admitted  the  far-<.  ..d  said, 
'it  ivas  not,  my  friends,  Captain  Elliott's  letter  ivhich  produced  tn_.  iii.o  chief ';' 
but  charges  the  murder  upon  General  Hunt  and  the  '  Telegraph,'  for  pub- 
lishing a  letter  of  the  former,  on  the  18th  of  January  previous. 

"  This  subterfuge  of  President  Houston  in  falsely  quoting  said  letter, 
and  so  preposterous  and  unjust  a  supposition  as  that  the  publication  of  the 
letter  of  a  private  gentleman  in  a  Texas  newspaper  could  be  sufficient 
with  the  Mexican  government  for  such  a  shocking  deed,  did  not  satisfy  the 
public  mind.  On  the  12th  of  December,  a  few  days  thereafter,  President 
Houston,  in  his  annual  message  to  Congress,  changed  his  ground  of  de- 
fence, and  said  '  that  it  was  a  retaliation  on  account  of  those  under  Gen- 
eral Somerville,  who  robbed  Laredo  ;'  thus  charging  this  bloody  deed  to 
his  particular  friends  of  Washington  and  Montgomery  counties,  who  return- 
ed under  Colonel  Bennett  from  that  place.  This  last  defence  of  the  Presi- 
dent, more  frivolous  than  the  former,  shows  under  what  awkward  ex- 
tremes guilt  will  seek  shelter. 

"  Perhaps  it  would  have  been  unnecessary  for  me  to  have  said  more 
upon  this  subject,  so  well  convinced  was  the  public  mind  of  President 
Houston's  criminal  and  malicious  agency  in  having  my  comrades  shot, 
and  others  starved  for  the  want  of  bread,  had  not  some  newspapers  in 
his  interest  recently  insulted  public  intelligence  by  speaking  of '  his  kind 
feelings  for  those  men.'  This  most  unblushing  and  barefaced  insult,  as  well 
to  the  memories  of  those  hundred  and  odd  whose  deaths  he  caused,  as  to 


APPENDIX    NO.    II.  459 

the  remaining  half  in  chains  and  slavery,  is  my  excuse,  if  one  were  ne- 
cessary, for  again  obtruding  myself  upon  the  public. 

"  Though  our  last  Congress  placed  to  the  credit  of  our  prisoners  in  Mex- 
ico thirty  thousand  dollars,  under  the  most  positive  and  peremptory  in- 
junctions upon  President  Houston  'forthwith''  to  supply  them,  not  one 
dollar  has  been  sent  them.  When  the  President  is  asked  why  he  has 
not  sent  the  money  to  these  men,  he  adds  insult  to  their  misfortunes  by 
saying  that  they  are  better  off  than  they  would  be  at  their  homes. 

"  No  man  of  sane  intellect,  whatever  may  be  his  devotion,  personal  or 
political,  to  President  Houston,  after  reading  the  annexed  correspond- 
ence, can  for  a  moment  doubt  that  he  was  the  malicious,  vindictive,  cold- 
blooded author  of  the  execution. 

"  Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

"Thomas  J.  Green." 

New-Orleans,  April  14th,  1844. 

Sir, — I  have  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  8th  of  No- 
vember, in  which  you  inform  me  that  President  Houston  not  only  disa- 
vows having  authorized  Captain  Elliott  to  write  such  a  letter  to  the  Hon. 
Richard  Packenham,  as  it  was  reported  that  he  had  done,  but  that  he  also 
asserts  that  no  communication  to  that  effect  had  ever  been  made  to  me 
by  Mr.  Packenham  or  Mr.  Doyle.  If  President  Houston  had  confined 
himself  to  the  disavowal  of  having  authorized  such  a  letter  to  have  been 
written,  I  do  not  know  that,  upon  mature  reflection,  I  should  have  con- 
sidered it  my  duty  to  have  made  any  statement  upon  the  subject ;  but  as 
the  matter  now  stands,  I  have  no  alternative  left  me.  I  therefore  send 
you  the  accompanying  statement,  with  a  note  from  Benjamin  E.  Green, 
Esq.,  and  another  addressed  by  me  to  Mr.  Doyle.  I  trust  that  nothing 
farther  can  be  required  of  me  in  the  matter.  You,  sir,  very  well  know 
that  my  name  has  been  involved  in  the  affair  by  no  officious  interference 
in  it,  and  it  has  been  made  public  contrary  to  my  advice  and  wishes. 
The  fact  of  such  a  letter  having  been  written  came  to  my  knowledge 
while  endeavouring,  under  the  express  orders  of  my  government  (given 
in  a  similar  case),  to  protect  those  brave  and  unfortunate  men,  the  pris- 
oners of  Mier.  It  was  a  matter  of  such  a  character  that  it  was  impossi- 
ble I  could  have  been  either  indifferent  or  mistaken  about  it.  I  have  fur- 
nished General  Houston  with  a  copy  of  this  statement.  I  have  the  hon- 
our to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Waddy  Thompson. 

General  Thomas  J.  Green. 

Mexico,  Dec.  20th,  1843. 
Shortly  after  I  heard  of  the  capture  of  the  Texian  prisoners  at  Mier, 


460  APPENDIX    NO.    II. 

and  having  serious  apprehensions  that  their  rights  as  prisoners  of  war 
might  be  violated,  I  called  upon  the  Hon.  Richard  Packenham  to  request 
that  he  would,  if  necessary,  add  his  great  and  well-deserved  influence 
with  the  Mexican  government  to  mine,  for  the  protection  of  those  men. 
He  expressed  at  once  a  willingness  to  do  so,  but  said  that,  from  what 
he  had  heard,  he  was  afraid  they  were  not  strictly  entitled  to  the  rights 
of  prisoners  of  war,  because  the  expedition  had  not  been  authorized 
by  the  Texian  government.  I  told  him  that  I  was  very  certain  he  was 
mistaken.  In  a  subsequent  interview  with  Mr.  Packenham  on  the  sub- 
ject, he  told  me  that  he  had  received  a  letter  from  Captain  Elliott,  H.  B. 
M.  charge  d'affaires  in  Texas,  saying  that  General  Houston  requested 
him  (Mr.  P.)  to  interpose  his  good  offices  in  behalf  of  the  Mier  prisoners, 
although  they  might  not,  in  strictness,  be  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  pris- 
oners of  war,  as  the  expedition  had  not  been  authorized  by  the  Texian 
government. 

Shortly  after  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Percy  W.  Doyle  in  Mexico,  I  had  a 
conversation  with  him  on  the  subject,  in  which  he  made  the  same  state- 
ment as  to  the  letter  of  Captain  Elliott ;  and  in  a  subsequent  conversation 
upon  the  subject,  he  added,  that  he  thought  it  probable,  in  saying  that 
the  expedition  was  not  authorized,  that  President  Houston  alluded  not  to 
the  original  expedition,  but  to  the  continuance  of  it  after  the  return  to 
Texas  of  General  Somerville.  Although  I  am  very  sure  that  in  this  I 
cannot  be  mistaken,  yet  if  I  am,  it  is  very  easy  to  prove  it  by  the  produc- 
tion of  the  letter,  or  a  statement  of  Mr.  Packenham. 

W.  Thompson. 

Mexico,  December  21st,  1843. 
General  W.  Thompson  : 

Dear  Sir, — In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  called  yesterday  upon 
the  Honourable  Percy  W.  Doyle  with  the  statement  which  is  copied 
above,  and  which  you  propose  to  send  to  General  T.  J.  Green,  upon  the 
subject  of  Captain  Elliott's  letter  to  Mr.  Packenham,  relative  to  the  Tex- 
ians  taken  prisoners  at  Mier.  Mr.  Doyle  declined  giving  me  a  copy  of 
Captain  Elliott's  letter,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  a  private  letter,  and  not 
addressed  to  him;  and  after  retiring  to  another  room  to  compare  your 
statement  with  that  letter,  he  admitted  that  the  statement  was  in  every 
respect  correct.     Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

(Signed),  Ben.  E.  Green. 

The  following  protest  from  a  committee  of  our  countrymen,  prisoners 
in  the  Castle  of  Perote,  dated  July,  1844,  to  the  British  minister  near  the 
government  of  Mexico,  has  immediate  reference  to  the  agency  which 
President  Houston  had  in  the  decimation  of  our  men  : 


APPENDIX    NO.    II.  461 

"  His  Excellency  Charles  Bankhead  : 

"  Sir, — The  undersigned,  a  committee  of  the  prisoners  now  confined  in 
the  Castle  of  Perote,  believing  that  we  are  abandoned  by  our  own  gov- 
ernment, have  only  the  alternative  left  of  appealing  to  the  minister  of  her 
Britannic  majesty  at  the  court  of  Mexico  to  interfere  with  a  view  of  put- 
ting a  termination  to  our  sufTering  and  imprisonment.  The  evidence  upon 
which  our  opinion  is  based,  that  we  are  surrendered  by  our  government, 
are,  first,  the  letter  to  your  predecessor  by  the  Executive  of  Texas,  de- 
nouncing the  Mier  expedition  as  a  lawless  band  of  adventurers,  unsanc- 
tioned by  the  authorities  of  the  country  whence  it  came,  and  therefore 
unentitled  to  the  consideration  and  protection  which,  by  civilized  usage 
and  of  right,  belong  to  prisoners  of  war.  Secondly,  his  withholding  the 
means  appropriated  by  Congress  for  our  relief,  when  well  apprized  of  our 
destitute  and  unfortunate  situation.  Thirdly,  his  entire  neglect  to  make 
any  exertion  in  our  behalf,  either  by  way  of  mitigating  our  hard  fate  or 
procuring  our  release.  The  only  anxiety,  within  the  knowledge  of  the 
undersigned,  evinced  by  President  Houston  for  the  Texian  prisoners,  is 
to  be  found  in  the  letter  above  referred  to,  which  resulted  in  the  melan- 
choly, tragic  scene  at  the  Ranch  Salado,  where  were  executed  in  cold 
blood  seventeen  as  brave  men  as  ever  enlisted  in  the  holy  cause  and  un- 
der the  sacred  banner  of  liberty.  Whether  this  solicitude  was  for  our 
weal  or  wo,  the  probable  tendency  of  its  operation,  and  its  actual  lament- 
able consequences,  will  show,  not  only  to  the  satisfaction  of  those  who 
executed,  but  those  who  prompted  the  horrid  act.  From  this  it  will  ap- 
pear that  this  appeal  properly  emanates  from  the  undersigned,  and  the  se- 
quel will  show  that  it  is  appropriately  addressed  to  your  excellency  the 
British  minister. 

"  We  believe,  sir,  that  the  government  of  Great  Britain  is  under  official 
obligation  to  demand  our  liberation.  Under  the  auspices,  and  through  the 
avowed  agency  of  the  charge  d'affaires  of  your  government  to  Texas,  a 
treaty  for  the  mutual  exchange  of  prisoners  was  entered  into  and  solemn- 
ly ratified  by  the  contracting  parties.  Texas  had  confidence  in  this  treaty 
from  the  fact  that  your  government  became  incidentally  a  party  to  it — 
your  charge  d'affaires  having  originated  it. 

"  The  undersigned  do  not  rest  their  grounds  for  the  interference  of  your 
excellency  in  their  behalf  upon  the  foregoing  showing  alone.  They  ap- 
peal to  you,  and  the  whole  corps  diplomatique,  as  conservators  of  inter- 
national law.  Diplomatic  agents,  clothed  with  ministerial  powers,  are 
called  ministers  to  the  different  courts  to  which  they  are  sent,  which 
term,  conjoined  to  their  official  duties,  implies  the  possession  of  judicial 
authority. 

"  If  this  position  be  true,  you  are  bound  to  notice  all  infractions  of  the 


462  APPENDIX    NO.   II. 

great  law  of  nations,  either  in  a  state  of  peace  or  in  the  turmoils  of  war, 
It  is  your  prerogative  to  control  and  regulate  the  operations  of  the  latter 
state  when  not  conducted  according  to  the  principles  of  humanity  and  the 
common  mild  usages  of  civilized  nations. 

"  In  the  undersigned  and  their  unfortunate  comrades  you  have  a  case 
which  solicits  the  controlling  influence  of  foreign  ministers.  The  hu- 
mane maxims  of  international  law,  the  acknowledged  customs  of  civil- 
ized nations,  have  all  alike  been  violated  and  disregarded  in  our  cruel 
treatment  and  unjust  detention. 

"  When  taken  at  Mier,  under  treaty  stipulations  guarantying  to  us  safety 
and  consideration,  we  were  marched  on  foot,  through  sunshine  and  through 
storm,  and  a  portion  of  the  way  handcuffed  in  couples,  under  the  taunt  - 
ings  and  lash  of  merciless  Mexican  soldiery.  In  the  villages  and  towns 
through  which  we  passed,  instead  of  being  treated  with  the  kind  courtesy 
usually  extended  by  generous  captors  to  vanquished  enemies,  we  were 
received  amid  the  hisses  and  maledictions  of  the  infuriated  rabble,  with 
placards  staring  us  in  the  face,  commemorating  the  defeat  of  the  Texian 
adventurers  and  robbers,  as  they  termed  us. 

"  The  bloody  tragedies  enacted  on  the  road  the  undersigned  refrain  from 
recapitulating ;  their  minds  shrink  with  horror  from  the  recital.  Lan- 
guage is  inadequate  to  express  the  deep  agony  of  the  heart  in  the  bare 
review  of  such  inhuman  acts.  Such  has  been  our  treatment  on  the  way 
to  Mexico,  and  the  same  harshness  still  continues. 

"  Only  a  few  days  since,  one  of  our  men,  a  Lieutenant  Clopton,  returned 
from  the  hospital  in  which  he  had  been  confined  for  five  or  six  weeks 
from  the  wounds  and  bruises  inflicted  upon  him  by  a  large  bludgeon  in 
the  hands  of  Captain  Arroya,  commandant  of  the  castle.  A  few  weeks 
ago,  a  pale  and  sickly  boy  was  so  severely  beaten  by  the  same  weapon, 
in  the  hands  of  the  same  officer,  as  to  be  compelled  to  carry  his  arm  in  a 
sling  for  some  time.  In  a  word,  we  are  miserably  fed,  badly  clothed,  and 
worked  like  beasts  of  burden.  Our  hard  fate  is  rendered  yet  more  intol- 
erable by  the  fact  that  neither  of  the  contending  parties  appear  to  make 
any  active  demonstrations  to  bring  the  war  to  a  close,  but  rather  prefer 
becoming  the  clients  of  Great  Britain,  the  United  States,  and  France. 
The  time  necessary  to  render  their  mediation  effective  must  necessarily 
be  long ;  and  during  this  state  of  nominal  peace  we  have  suffered,  and 
still  continue  to  suffer,  all  the  hardships  of  an  actual  state  of  warfare. 
" Very  respectfully,  Fenton  M.  Gibson,^ 

Claudius  Buster, 
William  S.  Fisher,  )>  Committee,' 
William  Ryan, 
Samuel  C.  Lyon, 


APPENDIX    NO.   III.  463 


No.  III. 

The  following  correspondence  and  orders  are  copied  from  "  Silgo  Diez 
Nueve,"  "  The  Nineteenth  Century,"  the  official  organ  of  the  Mexican 
government,  of  July  12th,  1843,  ail  of  which  proves  conclusively  that 
the  propositions  brought  to  Texas  by  Robinson  from  Santa  Anna  were 
accepted  by  Houston,  as  far  as  it  was  possible  for  him  to  do  so  ;  that  his 
(Houston's)  commissioners  were  sent  into  Mexico  to  treat  alone  upon  the 
basis  of  those  propositions,  and  that  the  armistice  which  they  did  sign  as 
the  representatives  of  the  "  department  of  Texas'"  farther  shows  that  they 
did  treat  upon  that  basis,  and  that  only  ;  and  that  these  evidences  were  in 
the  state  department  of  Texas  at  the  time  that  President  Houston  sent 
his  disgraceful  message  to  Congress  on  January  1st,  1844. 

Antonio  Lopez  de  Santa  Anna  to  Jose  Maria  de  Tornel,  Minister  of  War  and 

Marine. 

Manga  de  Clavo,  Feb.  6th,  1843. 

Excellent  Sir, — The  Texian  prisoner,  Mr.  William  Robinson,  has  ad- 
dressed me  the  letter  herewith  transmitted,  which  you  will  please  submit 
to  his  excellency  the  substitute  President.  In  it  he  manifests  a  disposi- 
tion to  contribute,  through  his  influence  in  that  department,  that  an  ar- 
rangement may  take  place,  explaining  also  the  terms  on  which  it  may 
be  obtained,  and  reasons  why  he  may  be  of  service  in  the  prosecution  of 
so  interesting  an  object.  Robinson,  perhaps,  will  operate  solely  with  a 
desire  to  obtain  his  liberty  ;  but  if  it  should  not  be  so,  and  he  should  act 
in  good  faith,  nothing  can  be  lost  on  hearing  him,  and  some  favourable 
result  may  be  obtained,  if,  through  the  knowledge  which  he  has  of  the 
present  difficult  and  very  compromised  situation  of  the  colonies,  he  should 
co-operate,  bring  them  to  reflect  on  their  own  true  interests,  and  to  ap- 
preciate the  characteristic  generosity  of  the  Mexican  nation. 

If  his  excellency,  the  substitute  President,  should  think  proper,  I  can 
hear  Robinson,  and  determine  from  conversations  with  him,  it  being  un- 
derstood that  I  will  not  make  concessions  which  can  affect  the  interests 
and  sacred  rights  of  the  nation. 

As,  in  political  affairs,  opportunities  occur  which  pass  by  rapidly,  I  be- 
lieve that  the  action  in  this  matter  should  be  rapid.  Hoping  that  you  will 
communicate  with  me  without  delay,  and  accept  the  protestations  of  my 
considerations,  I  subscribe  myself,  &c.,  &c., 

Antonio  Lopez  de  Santa  Anna. 


464  APPENDIX    NO.    III. 

Castle  of  Perote,  January  9th,  1843. 
General  Antonio  Lopez  de  Santa  Anna  : 

Most  excellent  Sir, — In  directing  myself  to  your  excellency  in  the  best 
manner  that  is  possible  to  me,  I  take  the  liberty  of  communicating  to 
your  excellency  matters  highly  important  for  Mexico  and  Texas.  I  have 
resided  many  years  in  Texas  as  a  colonist,  and  never  have  been  wanting 
in  obedience  to  the  laws  of  the  government  of  Mexico,  whose  goodness 
enabled  me  to  enjoy  fortune  and  prosperity  ;  but  inevitable  circumstances 
have  suspended  the  progressive  prosperity  of  the  Texian  people.  In  the 
month  of  March  last,  General  Arista  directed  a  proclamation  (and  I  re- 
tain perfectly  in  my  memory  the  terms  in  which  it  was  couched)  to  the 
people  of  Texas,  offering  protection  to  the  persons,  and  respect  for  the 
property  of  all  those  citizens  who  would  not  take  up  arms  against  Mexi- 
co. General  Woll,  upon  his  entry  into  Bexar  in  September  last,  gave  a 
general  order,  that  only  those  should  be  made  prisoners  who  were  found 
in  arms  against  Mexico.  I,  although  I  believed  it  was  a  party  for  the 
purpose  of  pillage,  did  not  make  use  of  my  arms,  and  laid  them  down  as 
soon  as  I  knew  they  were  troops  of  your  excellency — an  error  which  has 
made  me  appear  a  rebel.  I  now  desire,  as  I  have  already  desired  for 
many  years,  to  show  my  decided  adhesion  to  the  government  of  Mexico, 
for  which  intention  I  can  give  unquestionable  proof.  I  am  a  lawyer,  and, 
as  belongs  to  my  profession,  I  know  something  of  the  political  and  civil 
organization  of  the  governments  of  the  earth,  and  especially  of  those  of 
the  United  States  and  Texas  ;  and  I  find  myself  capable  of  giving  to  your 
excellency  information  that  few  can  give.  Upon  my  leaving  Saltillo,  and 
during  my  journey  to  this  place,  I  conceived  a  plan,  in  conformity  with 
ideas  which  had  agitated  my  mind  for  some  time  ;  but,  most  excellent  sir. 
fruitless  would  it  be  for  me  to  disclose  in  a  letter  all  the  details  of  a  plan, 
giving  clear  explanations,  and  answering  the  objections  which  might  pre- 
sent themselves,  being  better  able  to  do  it  personally.  Nevertheless,  to 
take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  which  presents  itself,  I  write  to  your  ex- 
cellency, and  permit  me  to  say  that  seven  and  a  half  years  of  war  have  made 
the  people  of  Texas  eager  for  peace  :  they  would  quickly  make  any  pru- 
dent sacrifice  to  reach  an  object  so  desirable,  and  the  more  so,  if  it  were 
on  such  a  basis  as  the  reunion  of  Mexico  and  Texas.  Among  my  com- 
panions in  prison  there  are  gentlemen  who  are  of  the  same  opinion  as 
myself,  who,  if  they  had  charge  of  a  mission  of  this  sort,  would  employ 
a  powerful  influence  in  Texas  to  obtain  the  grand  object  of  her  return  to 
duty.  The  proclamation  of  General  Arista  of  March  last  did  not  pro- 
duce the  desired  effect,  although  it  caused  many  to  remain  neutral.  If 
the  citizens  who  rejoiced  at  its  contents  had  openly  done  so,  they  would 
have  lost  their  property,  and  would  themselves  have  perished.     But  if 


APPENDIX    NO.   III.  465 

there  had  been  submitted  to  the  deliberation  of  the  Texian  people  a  sim- 
ilar proposition,  and  with  the  same  force  to  that  which  has  been  submit- 
ted to  the  people  of  Yucatan,  much  would  have  been  done,  because  the 
people  in  general  would  have  been  carried  to  an  open  discussion  of  the 
matter  without  the  fear  of  receiving  any  injury.  By  employing  these 
means,  the  most  advantageous  ends  may  be  expected.  The  citizens 
would  have  the  liberty  to  reflect  and  reason  with  deliberation  and  calm- 
ness upon  the  matter,  and  this  is  what  does  not  enter  into  the  plan  of 
General  Arista.  If  there  is  not  an  armistice  entered  into,  peace  cannot  be 
established.  Great,  very  great  would  be  the  benefits  which  could  be  ac- 
quired by  these  means.  Among  the  great  advantages  which  would  re- 
sult to  Mexico,  the  following  can  be  enumerated  : 

1st.  During  the  negotiations,  a  great  part  of  the  Texians  would  receive 
such  an  impression  as  would  be  in  a  manner  favourable  to  the  reunion. 
Many  would  remain  neutral,  thereby  causing  the  reunion  of  Mexico  and 
Texas  to  be  comparatively  an  object  of  easy  execution. 

2d.  The  liberty  of  the  prisoners  of  Santa  Fe,  under  word  of  honour, 
without  the  circumstance  of  hoping  that  the  Texians  would  make  pris- 
oners to  exchange  for  them,  was  an  act  of  generosity  which  made,  upon 
the  sober  and  tranquil  characters  of  the  citizens  of  Texas,  an  impression 
strong  enough  to  predispose  them  for  the  reunion. 

3d.  During  the  proposed  discussion,  the  advantages  they  would  receive 
in  the  sale  of  their  cotton  in  the  markets  of  Mexico  would  be  manifested 
openly  to  the  people  of  Texas — a  money  capital  of  near  half  a  million  of 
dollars  annually,  which  will  make  them  a  specie  fund  which  will  take 
the  place  of  paper  money :  without  this,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  sustain 
their  credit. 

4th.  It  will  fix  the  attention  on  the  evil  state  of  public  affairs  ;  and  then 
will  be  considered  the  impossibility  of  Texas  existing  as  an  independent 
state  without  ruining  the  people  with  taxes  which  they  cannot  bear. 

5th.  The  evil  management  of  affairs  will  also  be  manifest,  and  the 
people,  already  discontented  with  the  administration  of  General  Houston, 
will  become  alarmed,  and  will  operate  in  a  public  movement  such  as,  in 
my  opinion,  it  would  be  difficult  to  resist. 

6th.  The  discussion  would  give  time  to  the  old  colonists  to  compare 
their  former  peace  and  prosperity  with  the  actual  destination  over  their 
misery  and  broken  state,  and  would  augment  the  desires  wrhich  they  have 
for  a  reunion.  These  are  advantages  which  would  be  approved  of  by  the 
people  of  Texas  ;  and  in  view  of  their  taking  effect,  I  would  indicate  to 
your  excellency  how  appropriate  it  would  be  at  the  present  time  to  name 
commissioners,  and  unite  one  Or  two  of  the  gentlemen  who  are  with  me, 
who,  I  before  said,  are  of  my  opinion  ;  and  permit  me  to  recommend 

30 


466  APPENDIX    NO.   III. 

that  the  steps  which  are  to  be  taken  in  the  matter  should  be  taken  im 
mediately,  for  the  purpose  of  counteracting  whatever  measures  the  Con- 
gress of  Texas  might  take,  which  ought  to  meet  the  first  Monday  in  this 
month ;  for,  according  to  news  received  here  by  means  of  periodicals, 
part  of  the  members  of  the  Congress  of  Texas  ought  to  meet  at  Austin, 
and  part  at  Washington,  by  which  means  they  are  divided,  and  this  will  be 
a  good  opportunity  to  operate.  Furthermore,  although  the  Constitution 
provides  that  the  Congress  cannot  change  the  form  of  government,  they 
can  present  to  the  people  alterations.  The  presentation  to  the  Texian 
people  of  the  question  of  reunion  in  the  form  prescribed  by  the  Constitu- 
tion is  highly  important  as  a  political  movement,  although  "Mexico  does 
not  or  will  not  recognise  the  government  of  Texas."  This  being  the 
manner  prescribed,  the  great  difficulty  will  be  found  conquered  in  the 
beginning  of  the  affair.  Pursuing  such  a  course,  the  negotiations  will  be 
established,  and  then  the  people  could  operate  without  embarrassment 
and  with  efficiency. 

I  take  advantage  of  the  present  occasion  to  tender  to  your  excellency 
my  high  considerations  and  respect. 

(Signed),  J.  W.  Robinson. 

General  Tornel's  reply  to  General  Santa  Anna's  note  of  the  6th  inst  • 

Mexico,  Feb.  11th,  1843. 

Excellent  Sir, — I  gave  to  his  excellency  the  substitute  President  im- 
mediate notice  of  your  respected  letter  of  the  6th  instant,  in  which  you 
were  pleased  to  make  known  the  affair  of  the  Texian  prisoner,  Wra. 
Robinson,  whose  original  letter  accompanied  it,  and  being  informed  of 
all,  he  advises  me  to  request  you  to  act  with  all  the  necessary  powers  to 
hear  him  and  grant  that  which  is  proper  ;  or  to  hear  only,  and  transmit 
the  result  to  the  supreme  government,  in  case  you  consider  it  necessary. 
Satisfied  that  your  excellency  will  proceed  in  arrangements  with  the 
Texian  prisoners  with  your  customary  caution  and  prudence,  always  pre- 
serving the  rights  and  interests  of  the  nation  of  which  you  are  so  glorious 
a  defender,  the  government  abstains  from  giving  directions  of  any  kind, 
resting,  as  it  should,  in  the  just  opinion  that  your  excellency  should  di- 
rect this  matter  according  to  your  own  judgment. 

In  the  hope  that  you  will  bring  it  to  a  full  termination,  useful  and  hon- 
ourable to  the  Republic,  please  accept  my  expressions  of  high  considera- 
tion, &c,  &c,  Jose  Maria  de  Tornel. 

Antonio  Lopez  de  Santa  Anna  to  Jose  Maria  de  Tornel. 

Manga  de  Clavo,  Feb.  18th,  1843. 
Excellent  Sir,— In  accordance  with  the  authority  communicated  to  me 


APPENDIX    NO.  III.  467 

by  order  of  his  excellency  the  substitute  President,  to  call  the  Texian 
prisoner,  Wm.  Robinson,  and  hear  him  concerning  the  terms  in  which  it 
was  considered  that  the  reincorporation  of  that  department  with  the  Re- 
public might  be  obtained,  and  the  propositions  which  he  makes  to  secure 
so  desired  an  object,  I  directed  him  to  come  from  the  fortress  of  Perote 
to  this  hacienda  ;  and  after  long  conferences,  in  which  he  perfectly  con- 
vinced me  that  he  was  not  wanting  in  influence  or  means  to  produce  the 
conviction  in  Texas  of  the  importance  to  the  colonists  of  again  embracing 
the  protection  of  our  laws,  I  have  accepted  and  signed  the  propositions, 
a  copy  of  which  I  herewith  enclose  to  your  excellency,  and  have  set  Mr. 
Robinson  immediately  at  liberty,  that  he  may,  without  loss  of  time,  pro- 
ceed to  the  fulfilment  of  his  offices.  The  care  and  prudence  which  I 
have  taken  to  avoid  a  single  expression  which  can  in  any  manner  com- 
promise the  rights  of  the  nation,  so  dear  to  all  Mexicans,  so  sacred  to  me 
in  my  natural  sentiments,  because  it  has  made  me  its  keeper,  will  not 
escape  the  penetration  of  your  excellency.  And  I  simply  announce  that 
certain  concessions  can  be  granted  that  the  right  of  sovereignty  shall  re- 
main undisturbed,  of  which  the  present  situation  of  Texas  forms  a  ne- 
cessity and  guarantee  that  the  colonists  should  not  fail  to  demand  as  the 
foundation  of  their  future  tranquillity  and  welfare.  As  the  whole  subject 
is  submitted  to  negotiations,  in  which  the  government  should  act  with 
due  caution,  nothing  should  be  hazarded  to  plant  the  seeds  of  reconcilia- 
tion among  the  people  of  a  department  whose  dispositions  have  been  en- 
tirely alienated.  In  any  event,  entire  justice  shall  be  dispensed  to  the 
dictates  of  humanity  and  prudence,  provided  it  be  in  accordance  with  rea- 
son, even  though  accompanied  by  the  horrors  of  war. 

Please  present  my  expressions  of  esteem  to  his  excellency  the  substi- 
tute President,  and  accept  the  assurance  of  my  particular  regards. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c,  &c,  &c, 

Antonia  Lopez  de  Santa  Anna. 

The  next  in  order  is  the  following  copy  of  the  articles  signed  by  Santa 
Anna,  and  despatched  through  Judge  Robinson  to  this  government,  and 
which,  it  appears  from  the  subsequent  action  of  this  government,  was  ac- 
cepted by  President  Houston.  i 

Manga  de  Clavo,  Feb.  18th,  1843. 
The  undersigned,  authorized  by  the  supreme  government  of  the  Repub- 
lic to  confer  with  James  W.  Robinson,  the  Texian  prisoner  in  the  fortress 
of  Perote,  and  take  into  consideration  his  communication,  under  injunc- 
tion of  secrecy,  on  matter  of  great  importance  both  to  Mexico  and  Texas, 
in  which  various  propositions  are  made  to  bring  to  a  conclusion  the  pro- 


468  APPENDIX    NO.  III. 

longed  war  between  these  parties,  having  heard  all  that  was  to  be  offer- 
ed upon  the  subject,  and  considered  deliberately  each  proposition,  has 
agreed  with  said  Robinson  on  certain  bases  directed  to  this  object,  and 
for  the  prosecution  of  which  has  appointed  said  Robinson,  by  virtue  of  the 
facilities  with  which  he  is  invested,  to  proceed  in  accordance  therewith,  and 
to  use  those  efforts  which  in  his  judgment  should  be  most  convenient  and 
conducive  to  the  end  proposed.  In  virtue  whereof,  and  in  accordance 
with  said  bases,  Mr.  Robinson, 

1st.  Will  explain  to  the  inhabitants  of  Texas  that  the  supreme  govern- 
ment desires  the  termination  of  the  war  with  that  territory,  not  because 
it  feels  itself  without  means  or  resources  to  continue  it  until  it  obtains  a 
complete  triumph,  but  through  motives  of  humanity  and  the  interests  of 
the  colonists. 

2d.  That  thus  far  the  government  offers  to  throw  a  veil  over  the  past, 
granting  amnesty  to  all  whom  it  may  affect. 

3d.  That  as  the  bare  interests  of  the  inhabitants  are  founded  on  peace, 
tranquillity,  and  good  order,  and  the  security  of  person  and  property 
— benefits  which  they  cannot  enjoy  in  the  continually  agitated  condition 
which  is  the  natural  consequences  of  war — the  supreme  government  offers 
to  guaranty  these  benefits  in  their  full  enjoyment. 

4th.  That  the  inhabitants  of  Texas  shall  lay  down  their  arms,  and  rec- 
ognise as  an  essential  and  unalterable  condition  the  right  of  property  of 
Mexico  in  this  its  territory,  the  sovereignty  of  the  nation,  its  laws,  rules, 
and  general  orders. 

5th.  That  whereas  this  is  the  fundamental  basis  of  all  others,  no  other 
can  be  effectual  unless  this  be  admitted  by  Texas  in  its  most  unlimited 
extent,  and  without  the  slightest  modification. 

6th.  That  this  part  being  admitted  in  the  manner  aforesaid,  Texas  may 
appoint  its  own  functionaries  and  authorities,  military  and  political,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  general  Constitution  of  the  Republic. 

7th.  That  Mexican  troops  shall  not  be  sent  to  Texas,  the  said  depart- 
ment taking  care  to  provide  for  its  own  security  on  the  frontiers,  cover- 
ing them  with  its  own  forces,  composed  of  citizens  resident  within  it. 

8th.  That  in  regard  to  the  legislative  power,  the  respective  departmental 
Junta  shall  have  power,  in  virtue  of  its  attribute,  to  propose  to  the  general 
Congress  for  approval  or  decree  such  laws  as  may  be  considered  proper 
for  the  good  government  of  Texas. 

9th.  And,  finally,  that  Texas  shall  conform  in  all  other  matters  to  such 
regulations  as  may  be  established  for  the  other  departments  of  the  Re- 
public. 

These  bases  being  understood,  and  Mr.  Robinson  having  engaged  to  ful- 
fil his  commission  in  accordance  with  all,  and  with  the  utmost  efficacy 


APPENDIX    NO.    III.  4G9 

and  zeal,  it  is  understood  that  the  supreme  government  will  receive  with 
satisfaction  the  notice  of  a  favourable  result  of  his  laudable  efforts,  or 
any  commission  which  may  be  directed  to  the  capital,  where  I  shall  go 
within  a  few  days  to  resume  the  reins  of  government.  I  authorize  for 
this  purpose,  and  grant  to  the  said  Robinson  his  liberty,  and  permission 
to  leave  the  Republic  at  his  pleasure,  congratulating  myself  on  the  op- 
portunity which  permits  me  to  be  the  means  of  establishing  this  agree- 
ment, from  the  precise  fulfilment  of  which,  if  its  results  prove  favoura- 
ble, we  may  hope  the  complete  pacification  of  Texas,  and  its  reincorpo- 
ration in  the  Mexican  Republic,  of  which  it  is  an  integral  part. 

In  confirmation  of  which,  I  grant  this  document  to  said  Robinson  at 
my  hacienda  of  Manga  de  Clavo,  on  the  18th  of  February,  1843. 

Antonio  Lopez  de  Santa  Anna. 

Next  follows  a  letter  of  some  length,  from  Jose  Maria  de  Tornel  to  Santa 
Anna,  of  which  we  copy  only  the  first  paragraph,  that  being  all  that  is 
of  any  interest  to  our  readers : 

Mexico,  February  23d,  1843. 

Most  excellent  Sir, — On  receipt  of  your  respected  communication  of 
the  18th  instant,  I  submitted  it  to  his  excellency,  the  substitute  President, 
and  not  only  is  he  informed  of,  but  also  well  satisfied  with  the  prudence  and 
extraordinary  integrity  with  which  your  excellency  has  availed  yourself 
of  the  disposition  manifested  by  the  Texian  prisoner,  Mr.  Robinson,  to 
contribute,  by  his  personal  influence,  to  a  settlement  of  the  affairs  of 
Texas  ;  and  his  excellency  believes  that  the  propositions  drawn  up  and 
subscribed  by  your  excellency  will  protect  the  national  rights  and  the 
general  principles  of  our  political  organization,  without  the  hazard  of  any 
concession  which  the  colonists  may  demand  as  a  guaranty  of  their  future  fate. 

Office  of  Foreign  Relations  and  Government,  > 
Mexico,  July  7th,  1843.  S 

Most  excellent  Sir, — Mr.  Percy  W.  Doyle,  her  Britannic  majesty's 
charge  d'affaires,  has  addressed  to  me  a  communication,  a  copy  of  which  I 
transmit  to  your  excellency,  in  which  he  explains  what  has  been  done  in 
pursuance  of  the  propositions  of  which  Mr.  Robinson  was  the  bearer,  for 
the  purpose  of  bringing  to  a  conclusion  the  evils  of  the  war  between 
Mexico  and  Texas.  Copy  No.  2  is  the  copy  of  the  proclamation  of  Hous- 
ton on  the  armistice  which  Mr.  Doyle  has  transmitted  to  me,  and  No.  3 
is  to  advise  your  excellency  of  my  reply  to  that  gentleman,  in  accordance 
with  the  supreme  order  of  his  excellency  the  substitute  President,  and  also 
in  accordance  with  the  communications  which  I  have  received  on  the 
subject  from  the  office.     God  and  liberty  !  Bocanegra. 


470  APPENDIX    NO.    III. 

(No.  1.) 

Percy  W.  Doyle  to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Relations  and  Government. 

Mexico,  July  6th,  1843. 

Having  known  for  some  time  that,  by  means  of  Robinson,  one  of  the 
Texian  prisoners  set  at  liberty,  proposals  have  been  addressed  to  the  gov- 
ernment of  Texas,  which  I  have  received,  and  which  might  result  in  the 
establishment  of  peace,  I  advised  his  excellency  the  President  of  this  cir- 
cumstance, and  he  replied  to  me  that  he  was  disposed  to  receive  Texian 
commissioners  who  might  be  sent  to  treat  on  the  proposed  conditions,  ac- 
ceding, farther,  to  the  propositions  which  I  made  him,  that  a  declaration 
of  armistice  should  be  made,  in  order  to  carry  on  the  negotiations.  In 
consequence,  Unformed  the  charge  d'affaires  of  her  majesty  in  Texas  of 
what  had  occurred  without  loss  of  time,  and  in  consequence  of  the  com- 
munication between  that  gentleman  and  the  government  of  Texas,  Pres- 
ident Houston  has  published  a  decree,  of  which  I  have  the  honour  to  en- 
close a  copy,  in  which  he  directs  that  hostilities  shall  cease  forthwith  on 
the  frontier  of  Texas.  I  have  the  honour  to  advise  your  excellency  that 
it  may  be  brought  to  the  notice  of  his  excellency,  that  he  may  communi- 
cate to  me  the  measures  which  the  said  decree,  a  copy  of  which  is  en- 
closed, may  suggest,  in  order  that  I  may  inform  the  charge  d'affaires  of 
her  majesty  in  Texas  for  the  information  of  her  government. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  highest  consideration,  your  most 
obedient  humble  servant,  Percy  W.  Doyle. 

Next  follows  (No.  2)  Houston's  proclamation,  the  publication  of  which 
we  consider  quite  unnecessary  here. 

No.  3  is  a  letter  of  J.  M.  de  Bocanegra  to  Percy  W.  Doyle : 

National  Palace,  Mexico,  July  7th,  1843. 
Dear  Sir, — By  your  letter,  under  date  of  yesterday,  I  am  informed  of  what 
has  taken  place  in  consequence  of  the  proposals  of  which  the  lawyer  Robinson, 
one  of  the  Texian  prisoners,  was  the  bearer,  to  terminate  the  war  which 
Mexico  has  sustained  with  the  just  purpose  of  preserving  her  territory 
entire.  I  have  also  received  a  copy  of  the  provision  (proclamation)  dic- 
tated on  the  armistice,  which  result  has  been  obtained  by  the  measures 
taken  by  you  through  the  gentleman  charged  with  the  affairs  of  her  Bri- 
tannic majesty  near  said  Mr.  Houston.  I  have  brought  this  to  the  notice 
of  his  excellency  the  provisional  President,  and  he  has  advised  me  forth- 
with to  render  you  his  thanks,  as  I  have  the  honour  to  do,  for  the  part 
you  have  taken  in  a  matter  of  so  great  importance,  and  of  which  Mexico 
has  not  lost  sight.  The  good  offices  and  actions  which  you  have  been 
pleased  to  interpose  in  the  matter  merit  a  special  mention  and  corre- 


APPENDIX    NO.    III.  471 

sponding  gratitude  ;  therefore,  his  excellency  the  President,  instigated  by 
the  best  motives,  has  directed  that  the  necessary  orders  shall  issue  from 
the  office  of  war  for  the  suspension  of  hostilities  between  Mexico  and 
Texas,  as  is  expressed  in  the  annexed  copies  which  I  have  the  honour 
to  transmit  you,  and  the  fulfilment  of  which  will  be  exact  and  rigorous. 
With  this  beginning,  his  excellency  the  President  will  see  with  satis- 
faction that  you  should  make  known  to  Mr.  Houston,  through  said  agent 
of  her  Britannic  majesty  in  Texas,  that  commissioners  may  come  with 
competent  instructions,  based  upon  the  propositions  which  Robinson  took, 
wTith  the  understanding  that  their  journey  to  Mexico  maybe  made  by  sea 
or  land,  and  that  they  will  be  received  and  treated  like  those  from  Yuca- 
tan, as  his  excellency  is  animated  with  the  best  and  purest  intentions  to- 
wards both  departments. 

In  manifesting  to  you  the  manner  in  which  your  notice  has  been  re- 
ceived, and  the  measures  which,  in  consequence,  have  been  taken  so 
conformable  to  his  designs,  I  have  the  honour  to  repeat  my  considerations 
as  your  most  affectionate  and  obedient  servant.     S.  M.  B. 

J.  M.  DE  BoCANEGRA. 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  instructions  despatched,  to  General  Woll 
by  Tornel,  minister  of  war  and  marine,  on  the  reception  of  General  Hous- 
ton's proclamation  of  armistice  ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  the  proclama- 
tion of  armistice  on  the  part  of  Mexico  : 

Mexico,  July  7th,  1843. 
To  General  Adrian  Woll,  Commander-in-chief  i 
of  the  Army  of  the  North.  > 

Excellent  Sir, — By  the  accompanying  documents  you  will  be  fully  in- 
formed that  Mr.  Samuel  Houston  has  proclaimed  an  armistice  in  the  de- 
partment of  Texas,  in  consequence  of  the  admission  of  the  propositions 
which  the  lawyer,  Mr.  Robinson,  made,  that  they  might  be  made  the  basis 
for  a  discussion,  the  result  of  which  should  be  an  agreement  whereby 
the  rights  of  the  Republic  and  its  interests  should  be  combined  with  those 
of  Texas.  And  as  the  operations  of  government  should  always  be  accom- 
panied by  a  consequent  and  unchangeable  good  faith,  it  has  resolved,  in  the 
name  of  the  nation,  upon  the  propositions  of  armistice,  and  that  it  be 
confirmed  by  both  parties  according  to  the  laws  of  war. 

In  consequence,  his  excellency  the  provisional  President  directs  me 
to  advise  you  that  hostilities  with  Texas  are  suspended  for  a  time  at  all 
parts  on  the  line  of  your  command,  retiring  your  advanced  posts,  spies, 
parties  of  observation,  and  all  forces  destined  to  molest  the  enemy,  sus- 
pending during  the  armistice  your  march  to  the  centre  of  Texas  with  a 


472  APPENDIX    NO.  III. 

strong  division  of  cavalry,  yourself  being  personally  in  command,  ac- 
cording to  your  orders  of  the  2d  and  28th  of  June,  and  those  of  the  5th 
instant,  forwarded  by  your  aid-de-camp  Jose  Washington  Eayrs.  Not- 
withstanding, you  will  not  fail  to  employ  the  $180,000,  which  I  have  re- 
mitted to  you  in  two  parts,  in  the  regulation,  enlistment,  and  equipment 
of  the  said  division  of  forces  under  your  command,  nor  the  other  means 
placed  at  your  disposition  ;  because,  while  the  negotiation  may  not  reach 
a  definite  conclusion,  we  should  prepare  in  peace  for  war,  as  the  sacred 
interests  of  the  Republic  demand. 

That  the  armistice  may  be  proclaimed  according  to  the  terms  pre- 
scribed by  the  usages  and  practice  of  war,  you  will  officially  advise 
Mr.  Samuel  Houston  to  nominate  commissioners,  who,  in  conjunction 
with  those  appointed  by  you,  will  be  subject  to  the  following  regula- 
tions : 

1st.  The  armistice  shall  be  submitted  to  the  supreme  government, 
but  hostilities  shall  be  immediately  suspended. 

2d.  It  shall  be  stipulated  in  the  armistice  that  the  so  called  govern- 
ment of  Texas  shall  send  commissioners  to  the  capital  of  the  Repub- 
lic, who  shall  make  to  the  supreme  government  those  propositions  which 
they  shall  consider  correct,  on  the  basis  of  the  propositions  which  the  lawyer 
Robinson  conveyed,  and  which  will  be  matter  of  discussion. 

3d.  The  armistice  shall  continue  during  the  time  necessary  for  the 
purpose  ;  but  a  prudent  time  shall  be  agreed  upon  for  the  renewal  of  hos- 
tilities, when  either  of  the  parties  shall  so  determine,  giving  previous  no- 
tice, as  is  customary  in  like  cases. 

4th.  The  commissioners  shall  enjoy  the  same  securities  granted  to 
those  sent  from  the  department  of  Yucatan,  and,  on  their  arrival,  stay, 
and  return,  shall  be  protected  by  the  Mexican  laws  and  authorities. 

His  excellency  the  provisional  President  has  full  confidence  in  your 
circumspection  in  the  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  upon  you — a  gen- 
eral so  deserving  of  gratitude  for  leading  the  arms  of  the  Republic  to  the 
acquisition  of  new  glories  on  the  field  of  Texas. 

I  present  to  your  excellency  my  sentiments  of  the  highest  considera- 
tion and  esteem,  &c.  Jose  Maria  de  Tornel. 

Following  the  above  is  the  armistice  agreed  upon  by  the  Texian  com- 
missioners, acknowledging  Texas  as  a  "  department  of  Mexico,''1  which  it 
is  unnecessary  to  insert  here. 

The  following  is  the  manifesto  from  General  Adrian  Woll,  of  the  Mex- 
ican army,  to  President  Houston,  informing  him  of  the  recommencement 
of  hostilities  against  the  usurpers  of  Texas  for  a  non-compliance  with  the 
armistice  entered  into  by  their  commissioners  : 


APPENDIX    NO.   III.  473 

First  Brigade  of  the  North,  Headquarters. 

The  delay  fixed  by  the  supreme  government  in  the  armistice  conclu- 
ded the  15th  of  February  of  the  present  year  with  the  commissioners 
having  expired,  his  excellency  the  President  has  called  to  mind  that, 
from  the  11th  of  the  present  month,  hostilities  are  reopened  against  the 
inhabitants  of  this  department,  and  I  communicate  to  you  the  declaration 
of  his  excellency.  I  also  make  known  to  you  that  my  government  has 
seen,  with  well-founded  indignation,  the  perfidies  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  said  territory  towards  a  republic  whose  generous  conduct  to  them 
they  misunderstood  in  relation  to  a  question  in  which  they  were  thought 
to  be  acting  in  good  faith.  They  have  abused  the  confidence  of  the  Repub- 
lic by  violating  the  conditions  of  the  armistice  respecting  the  commission- 
ers, who,  according  to  the  fourth  article  of  said  armistice,  should  have 
repaired  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  in  order  to  regulate  our  differences  so  far 
as  their  propositions  might  be  admissible.  His  excellency  the  President, 
convinced  that  the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  nation  require  the  chas- 
tisement of  a  conduct  so  little  creditable,  has  ordered  me  to  apprize  you 
of  his  resolution,  so  that  it  may  be  well  understood  that  it  is  not  through 
timidity  or  want  of  power,  but  because  his  excellency  has  always  listen- 
ed to  the  voice  of  humanity,  that  hostilities  were  not  commenced  at  the 
period  fixed  by  the  armistice. 

Notwithstanding  my  regret  in  thinking  that  blood  is  once  more  to  flow, 
yet  in  transmitting  to  you  the  declaration  of  the  President,  I  enjoy  the 
satisfaction  to  find  that  justice  is  on  the  side  of  our  cause,  which  reposes 
on  sacred  and  imprescriptible  rights.  In  this  we  place  our  confidence,  as 
well  as  in  the  valour  of  our  troops.  When  the  struggle  shall  once  more 
begin,  the  civilized  world  will  judge  between  us,  and  the  fortune  of  war 
cannot  but  be  favourable  to  those  who  fight  for  their  country  against 
usurpers. 

I  have  the  honour  to  renew  to  you  assurances  of  my  high  consider- 
ation. 

Headquarters,  Mier,  19th  June,  1841 

Adrian  Woll. 
To  Gen.  Sam.  Houston. 

3P 


474  APPENDIX    NO.    IV. 


No.  IV. 


AT    THE    BATTLE    OF    MIER. 

When  I  was  taken  prisoner  (at  the  Battle  of  Mier),  I  was  immedi- 
ately conveyed  to  General  Ampudia,  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Mex- 
ican army  then  there,  who,  after  interrogating  me,  through  the  medium  of 
an  interpreter,  respecting  the  numbers  of  theTexian  force,  and  the  name 
of  their  commanding  officer,  ordered  that  I  should  bear  a  flag  to  Colonel 
Fisher,  demanding  an  immediate  surrender.  Perceiving  that  I  gave  no 
reply,  and  evinced  no  disposition  to  obey  such  an  order,  he  said  that  it 
was  useless  for  me  to  refuse,  as  I  should  be  compelled  to  do  it.  He  seiz- 
ed me  by  the  shoulder,  while  Colonel  Carasco  laid  hold  upon  the  other,  and 
forced  me  to  the  corner  of  a  street  leading  in  the  direction  of  our  troops, 
dictating  at  the  time  the  following  message  to  me,  to  be  delivered  to  the 
Texian  commander,  viz. :  "  Say  to  Colonel  Fisher  that  he  must  surrender 
with  his  whole  force  in  five  minutes,  or  I  will  cause  them  all  to  be  put  to 
the  sword,  and  give  no  quarter — to  accomplish  this,  I  have  1700  regular 
troops,  and  look  every  moment  for  a  re-enforcement  of  800 — and  that,  if 
he  will  cause  his  troops  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  surrender  in  that 
time,  their  lives  shall  be  spared,  and  they  shall  be  treated  with  all  the  hu- 
manity and  deference  due  them  as  prisoners  of  war  ;  and,  furthermore,  I 
will  exercise  my  influence  with  the  supreme  government  to  prevent  their 
being  marched  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  but  to  have  them  retained  east  of  the 
mountains  until  they  are  released  or  exchanged." 

Accompanied  by  a  Mexican  soldier,  as  I  entered  our  lines  I  discov- 
ered Colonel  Fisher,  who,  when  he  perceived  me,  advanced  a  short  dis- 
tance to  a  low  stone  wall.  When  we  met,  I  informed  him  that  I  had 
been  compelled  to  bear  a  flag  with  a  verbal  message  to  him,  and  while 
relating  the  purport  of  it,  the  incessant  discharge  of  musketry  prevented 
him  from  hearing  :  motioning  for  me  to  remain  silent,  he  gave  orders  for 
the  firing  to  cease.  So  soon  as  it  had  discontinued,  he  turned  to  me  and 
inquired,  "  What  does  this  flag  mean?'  I  then  repeated  what  has  been 
stated  above.  After  concluding,  I  watched  closely  and  eagerly  for  a  re- 
ply. Without  saying  a  word,  he  cast  his  eyes  upon  the  ground  as  if  un- 
determined, and  endeavouring  to  decide  upon  what  course  he  should  pur- 
sue. Meditating  in  this  position  for  a  brief  period,  he  at  length  came  to 
some  conclusion,  when  he  leaped  the  wall  and  advanced  to  the  position 
occupied  by  Cameron  and  Ryan's  companies  particularly,  without  taking 
any  farther  notice  of  me,  either  by  word  or  sign.     I  instantly  followed  to 


APPENDIX    NO.   IV.  475 

await  his  instructions.  He  called  together  a  council  of  his  officers,  at 
which  time  the  Mexican  officers  took  the  opportunity  to  venture  within 
our  lines.  What  occurred  from  this  time  you  had  an  opportunity  of  be- 
coming as  well  acquainted  with  as  myself. 

The  preceding,  sir,  is  a  brief  statement  of  facts,  as  they  transpired 
between  the  colonel  and  myself.  I  do  not  wish  to  increase  the  length 
of  this  paper  so  as  to  become  wearisome  to  the  reader,  yet  I  can- 
not conclude  without  mentioning  some  circumstances  relative  to  this  mat- 
ter that,  I  trust,  will  enable  the  reader  to  arrive  at  a  just  and  impartial 
opinion.  I  presume  it  is  well  known  that  during  an  action,  when  an  or- 
der is  given  by  an  officer  to  his  inferiors  in  rank,  and  the  obedience  of 
which  is  necessary  in  securing  the  safety  and  success  of  a  body  of  men, 
that  a  disobedience  most  frequently  is  considered  as  a  direct  violation  of 
the  regulations  of  the  military  code,  and  renders  the  offender  liable  to  the 
severest  punishment  that  can  be  inflicted  upon  him,  instantaneously,  and 
that  without  the  convening  of  a  military  court.  Had  I  voluntarily  diso- 
beyed any  order  that  Colonel  Fisher  states  he  gave  me,  why  did  he  not 
enforce  upon  me  the  penalty  as  the  results  of  its  violation  !  He  held  a 
pistol  in  his  hand  at  the  time,  and  would  have  been  held  justifiable  in 
making  immediate  use  of  it  upon  me. 

Again  :  Does  it  not  appear  improbable  that  he  should  have  commanded 
me  to  return  with  the  flag  without  having  any  knowledge  of  the  object 
for  which  it  was  sent,  as  he  could  know  nothing  of  its  errand  excepting 
from  conjecture  1  He  had  as  much  right  to  suppose,  as  otherwise,  that  the 
enemy  wished  to  enter  into  some  terms  with  him  for  their  own  safety,  as 
well  as  that  of  their  wounded,  and  the  town  with  its  inhabitants  ;  for  he 
is  well  aware  that  a  commander  will  always,  whenever  within  his  power, 
after  he  is  defeated,  make  the  best  stipulations  he  can  with  his  victor. 

You  will  recollect  I  had  an  interview  with  the  colonel  in  the  morning 
of  Friday,  the  30th  December,  a  short  time  previous  to  our  men  being 
marched  off  to  Matamoras.  In  the  conversation  I  then  held  with  him, 
he  never  intimated,  in  the  slightest  degree,  that  he  had  given  me  such  an 
order,  but,  on  the  contrary,  when  the  subject  of  my  bearing  the  flag  was 
introduced,  he  assured  me  that  himself  nor  any  other  person  had  or  could 
attach  any  censure  to  me  for  the  course  I  was  compelled  to  pursue. 
Moreover,  I  do  most  positively  assert,  that  during  my  imprisonment  I 
had  frequent  conversations  with  the  men,  as  well  as  the  officers,  in  rela- 
tion to  our  capitulation,  and  not  one  of  them  ever  mentioned  to  me  of 
having  heard  of  such  an  order  being  given,  or  ever  passed  a  word  of  con- 
demnation upon  me  for  my  conduct  during  any  period  of  that  engage- 
ment. 

Having  already  extended  this  communication  to  a  much  greater  length 


476 


APPENDIX    NO.    V. 


than  I  intended,  I  shall  add  nothing  more  than  a  sincere  desire  that  your 
publication  may  have  an  extensive  circulation,  and  that  it  may  be  written 
both  justly  and  impartially. 

Most  respectfully  yours,  John  J.  Sinnickson. 

To  General  Thomas  J.  Green. 


No.  V. 

The  following  is  a  List  of  the  Mier  Prisoners  who  were  released  on  the  \§th 
of  September,  1844,  by  the  Mexican  Government,  and  who  arrived  in  New- 
Orleans  per  Schooner  Creole,  Captain  Dessechi,  which  sailed  on  the  22d  of 
September :  passage,  thirteen  days  from  Vera  Cruz.  Several  Mier  Prison- 
ers remained  in  Mexico,  and  others  took  a  different  route  home. 


Ackerman,  P.  A. 
Alexander,  M. 
Allen,  David. 
Armstrong,  A. 
Arthur,  Francis. 
Baker,  J.  R.,  Captain. 
Barney,  Daniel  F. 
Bassett,  R.  P. 
Beasley,  D.  H.  E. 
Bell,  T.  W. 
Berry,  Bate  J. 
Bowman,  B.  F. 
Boon,  B.  Z. 
Brennan,  John. 
Bridger,  H. 
Brown,  Richard. 
Brush,  G.  R. 
Bush,  G.  W. 
Buster,  C,  Captain. 
Calvert,  John. 
Censibeau,  T.  J. 
Clark,  Willis  G. 
Clopton,  W.,  Lieutenant. 
Copeland,  W. 
Davis,  Thomas. 
Davis,  William. 
Davis,  W.  K. 
Dillon,  J.  F. 


Douglas,  Freeman  W.,  Lieutenant. 

Downes,  N.  G. 

Dunbar,  William. 

Edwards,  Leonidas  D.  F. 

Fisher,  William  S.,  Colonel. 

Frensley,  William  H. 

Gibson,  F.  M.,  Quartermaster. 

Gibson,  William. 

Glascock,  James  A. 

Goodman,  S. 

Grubs,  F. 

Hanna,  A.  B. 

Harvey,  John. 

Harrison,  F.  W.  T. 

Heddenburg,  Abraham  D. 

Hensley,  C. 

Hoffer,  John. 

Humphries,  J.  J. 

Jackson,  Edward  B. 

Journie,  H. 

Kaigler,  William. 

Kelly,  Charles  S. 

King,  R.  B. 

Lacy,  John. 

Lewis,  A.  J. 

Lee,  A.  A.,  Lieutenant 

Livergood,  J.  H. 

Lord,  George. 


APPENDIX  NO.  VI. 


477 


Lovergy,  J. 

Lyon,  S.  C,  Sailingmaster. 

Matthews,  Alexander. 

Maxwell,  P.  M. 

Middleton,  William  B. 

Miller,  Henry. 

Millon,  W.  E. 

Mills,  John. 

Mills,  Lawson. 

Morrell,  H.  B. 

M'Cutcheon,  J.  D. 

M'Fall,  Samuel. 

M'Ginly,  John. 

M'Mullen,  John. 

Nealy,  James  B. 

Nelson,  Thomas. 

Oats,  H.  H. 

Overton,  D. 

Peacock,  James. 

Phillips,  James. 

Pierson,  J.  G.  W.,  Captain. 

Pilley,  Robert  M. 

Pitts,  E.  H. 

Riley,  F. 

Roberts,  H.  H. 


Rogers,  Mark. 

Roark,  A.  J. 

Runyan,  William  J. 

Sargeant,  W. 

Sansberry,  John. 

Sellers,  Harvey  W. 

Smith,  J. 

Sullivan,  Daniel  C. 

Tanney,  John 

Thompson,  Thomas  A. 

Thurmond,  Alfred  S. 

Toops,  John. 

Trehern,  George  Washington. 

Turner,  R.  W. 

Vandyke,  Wilson  M. 

Van  Vechten,  D.  H. 

Watkins,  Joseph  D. 

White,  F. 

Whitehurst,  F. 

Williams,  Levi. 

Willoughby,  R. 

Woodland,  H. 

Young,  James. 

Zumatt,  Isaac. 


The  following  Five  were  Released  a  few  Weeks  previous  to  the  above. 
Armstrong,  James  C, 


Ryan,  William,  Captain. 
Tatum,  Thomas, 
Wallace,  William  A., 
Wilson,  William  F., 


Liberated  by  Petition  from  many  Members  of 
the  United  States  Congress. 


No.  VI. 

Though  the  Eighth  Congress  of  the  Republic  of  Texas,  in  December, 
1843,  voted  an  appropriation  of  fifteen  thousand  dollars  to  our  countrymen 
in  the  Mexican  prisons  ;  and  again,  in  February,  1844,  fifteen  thousand  dol- 
lars in  addition  to  the  first  appropriation  (see  Journals  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  Eighth  Congress,  page  450),  yet,  eight  months  thereafter, 
when  public  opinion  in  Texas  forced  him  (President  Houston)  to  pay  some 


478  APPENDIX    NO.    VI. 

little  regard  to  these  most  peremptory  laws  of  the  land,  he  condescended 
to  place  to  their  use  two  thousand  dollars,  two  hundred  of  which  was,  by 
special  provision  of  the  law,  paid  over  to  our  unfortunate  countryman,  An- 
tonio Navarro.  This  was  done  by  sending  a  special  agent  with  the  pal- 
try sum,  whose  pay  and  expenses  must  have  come  to  fifty  per  cent,  of  the 
amount  which  our  one  hundred  and  twenty  surviving  countrymen  receiv- 
ed, when  a  bank  deposite  in  New-Orleans,  against  which  they  could  have 
drawn,  would  have  been  worth  from  six  to  eight  per  cent,  premium.  It 
will  be  recollected,  that  when  this  insulting  show  of  regard  for  our  prison- 
ers was  made  by  President  Houston,  both  himself  and  newspapers  in 
Texas  were  boasting  of  "  the  par  circulation,"  "surplus  in  the  treasury," 
"  great  receipts  in  the  custom-house,"  &c,  &c. 

What  we  have  said,  and  the  abundant  proof  heretofore  furnished,  can- 
not fail  to  satisfy  every  impartial  reader  that  President  Houston's  first 
object  was  to  have  the  whole  of  the  Mier  men  shot  in  Mexico,  when  he 
wrote  to  that  government,  through  the  British  minister,  that  "  they  had 
entered  that  country  without  authority,"  and  consequently  were  "  rob- 
bers and  marauders  ;"  and  failing  in  this,  to  have  any  but  the  brave  Cap- 
tain Cameron  and  each  tenth  man  shot,  his  second  plan  was  to  starve 
the  remainder  to  death  in  Mexican  dungeons.  This  he  wellnigh  effect- 
ed by  a  usurpation  of  the  laws  of  the  land  which  voted  them  bread,  and 
which  the  remnant  of  their  muster-roll  will  show. 

He  who  deals  in  falsehood  is  ever  in  danger  of  self-conviction,  and  such 
has  been  President  Houston's  misfortune.  From  the  Battle  of  Mier  up  to 
the  fall  of  1843,  both  the  President  and  his  partisans  in  Texas  were  busy 
in  denying  that  he  ever  wrote  such  a  letter  to  the  British  minister  as  was 
charged  and  proven  upon  him,  and  that  the  Mier  commander  had  had  his 
orders  to  invade  Mexico.  But  on  the  27th  of  January,  1844,  when  that 
excitement  had  measurably  subsided,  and  to  subserve  his  vindictiveness 
towards  a  gallant  soldier,  Colonel  William  G.  Cooke,  he  forgets  his  for- 
mer denials,  and  in  his  veto  message  of  this  date  (see  Journals  of  House 
of  Representatives,  Eighth  Congress,  page  375)  he  writes  as  follows  : 

Executive  Department,  Washington,  Jan.  27th,  1844. 
To  the  Honourable  the  House  of  Representatives  : 

The  Executive  regrets  to  find  himself  under  the  necessity  of  withhold- 
ing his  assent  from  the  bill  for  the  relief  of  William  G.  Cooke,  late  acting 
quartermaster  general.  The  reasons  which  impel  him  to  do  so  are,  as 
he  conceives,  of  the  most  forcible  character. 

In  the  first  place,  the  government  never  promised  those  who  should 
participate  in  the  late  campaign  to  the  Rio  Grande  anything  more  than 
authority  to  march,  such  ammunition  and  arms  as  could  be  furnished,  and 


APPENDIX    NO.    VI.  479 

the  spoils  acquired  from  the  enemy,  according  to  the  laws  of  civilized  war- 
fare. This  fact  is  shown  by  the  accompanying  note  from  the  secretary  of 
war  and  marine,  which  is  intended  to  form  a  part  of  this  message,  and 
the  published  declarations  of  the  Executive  himself.  In  an  address  to  the 
people  of  Texas,  dated  July,  1842,  and  published  in  the  newspapers  of  the 
day,  the  Executive  remarked,  in  reference  to  the  contemplated  expedition, 
that  "  the  government  will  promise  nothing  but  authority  to  march,  and 
such  supplies  of  ammunition  as  may  be  needful  for  the  campaign.  They 
must  look  to  the  Valley  of  the  Rio  Grande  for  remuneration.  The  govern- 
ment will  claim  no  portion  of  the  spoils  :  they  will  be  divided  among  the 
victors.     The  flag  of  Texas  will  accompany  the  expedition." 

From  this  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  government  was  guarded  against 
incurring  any  pecuniary  responsibilities  on  account  of  the  campaign.  For 
this  reason,  they  were  authorized  to  cross  the  Rio  Grande,  "and  make 
such  reprisals  upon  Mexico  as  civilized  and  honourable  warfare  would 
justify  in  the  relations  then  existing  with  the  common  enemy."  The  Ex- 
ecutive knew  full  well  at  that  period,  as  he  does  now,  that  the  means  of 
the  country  could  not  sustain  the  expense  of  the  expedition,  and  hence  he 
based  his  call  to  the  citizen  soldiers  of  the  Republic  upon  what  he  believ- 
ed to  be  their  patriotic  desire  and  readiness  to  engage  in  the  undertaking  ; 
and  because  he  knew  the  inability  of  the  country  to  pay  them  for  their  ser- 
vices, he  plainly  told  them  they  must  look  "  for  remuneration  to  the  Valley 
of  the  Rio  Grande." 

....  It  is  just  that  all  should  be  regarded  on  the  same  footing,  and  the 
claims  of  no  one  preferred  to  those  of  all  the  rest.  The  widows  and  or- 
phans of  the  brave  and  unfortunate  decimated  have  not  petitioned  Con- 
gress for  pay  or  relief,  &c.  Sam.  Houston. 

Thus,  in  one  short  year,  in  subserving  this  vindictive  hatred  of  one  indi- 
vidual, he  furnishes  the  world  from  under  his  own  hand  the  evidences  of 
his  guilt  ;  and,  notwithstanding  the  many  falsehoods  which  he  asserted, 
and  some  of  his  partisans  reiterated  about  his  desire  to  serve  our  suffer- 
ing fellow-citizens  in  the  Mexican  prisons,  we  absolutely  see  them  re- 
leased, without  any  influence  or  agency  of  his,  at  a  distance  of  more  than 
a  thousand  miles  from  their  homes,  with  one  dollar  each,  which  the 
charity  of  the  "  magnanimous  nation"  gave  them  to  bear  their  expenses. 
"We  see  them  turned  loose  upon  the  levee  of  New-Orleans  in  the  greatest 
possible  destitution,  covered  with  filth  and  rags,  and  sustained  by  the  char- 
ity of  the  good  people  of  that  city  ;  and  thus  we  see  them  begging  their 
way  back  to  Texas,  with  one  proud  feeling  still  uppermost  in  their  bo- 
soms— to  die  for  the  honour  and  liberty  of  that  country  whose  executive 
chief  had  slandered  them  all — had  murdered  some — had  starved  by  piece- 


480  APPENDIX    NO.  VII. 

meal  many,  and  basely  insulted  the  remainder  when  in  chains  !  What  a 
moral  reflection  this  for  Mexico,  and  how  hopeless,  should  it  prove,  is  her 
vain  hope  of  reconquering  such  a  people  ! 

In  the  face  of  the  foregoing  facts,  President  Houston  has  had  the 
shameless  hardihood,  in  his  last  annual  message  to  the  Ninth  Congress, 
dated  December  4th,  1844,  to  say,  that  "  the  laws  of  the  last  Congress 
touching  our  prisoners  in  Mexico  were  carried  out  as  fully  and  as  speed- 
ily as  circumstances  would  permit." 


No.  VII. 

November  29th,  1844. 
General  Thomas  J.  Green : 

Dear  Sir, — I  have  perused,  with  infinite  pleasure,  your  manuscript  de- 
tailing the  Battle  of  Mier,  the  captivity,  imprisonment,  and  sufferings  of 
yourself  and  fellow-prisoners  in  the  loathsome  Castle  of  Perote,  together 
with  your  adventurous  and  successful  escape  from  that  almost  impregna- 
ble fortress. 

The  spirit-stirring  incidents,  from  the  commencement  to  the  end  of 
your  journal,  cannot  fail  to  excite  a  lively  interest  in  the  breast  of  every 
reader. 

With  myself,  and  your  numerous  friends  in  this  country,  your  details 
have  peculiar  interest,  from  our  knowledge  of  the  fidelity  with  which  they 
are  given.  Independent  of  my  knowledge  of  the  frankness  of  your  char- 
acter, an  intimate  acquaintance  with  many  of  your  fellow-prisoners,  with 
whom  I  have  had  frequent  conversations,  enables  me  to  judge  the  cor- 
rectness of  your  narrative.  Permit  me,  therefore,  to  solicit  the  publica- 
tion of  your  journal  as  soon  as  practicable,  inasmuch  as  it  is  immediately 
connected  with  our  Revolution,  and  forms  one  of  the  important  events 
attending  its  progress. 

Most  respectfully,  your  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

B.  T.  Archer. 

Oakland,  January  4th,  1845. 
General  Thomas  J.  Green : 

Dear  Sir, — Our  mutual  friend,  Dr.  Archer,  informs  me  that  you  have 
prepared  a  minute  account  of  the  Battle  of  Mier,  and  of  the  incidents,  an- 
terior and  subsequent,  connected  with  that  brilliant  though  calamitous 
event. 

There  are  but  few  instances  in  which  the  great  superiority  of  Texian 
arms  over  those  of  our  boastful  enemies  have  been  more  fully  illustrated 


APPENDIX    NO.    VII.  481 

than  in  that  conflict,  which  has  elicited  so  little  of  the  public  sympathy, 
and  attracted  so  small  a  share  of  admiration.  It  is  no  new  idea  that  suc- 
cess is  necessary  to  applause.  The  fame  of  the  brief  and  almost  unre- 
sisted onslaught  of  San  Jacinto,  of  eighteen  minutes'  continuance,  has 
resounded  throughout  the  world,  and  in  the  imaginations  of  the  uninform- 
ed, has  wreathed  the  brow  of  the  nominal  commander,  who  was  literally 
compelled  into  the  chase,  with  the  garland  of  heroism,  while  the  protract- 
ed and  bloody  battle  of  Mier  has  scarcely  been  perpetuated  by  newspaper 
advertisement.  There  is,  however,  consolation  in  the  thought  that,  al- 
though one's  contemporaries  may  fail  to  do  justice  to  his  public  acts,  and 
may  confer  unmerited  plaudits  upon  the  recreant  and  unworthy,  a  better- 
informed  and  more  dispassionate  posterity  will  render  honour  to  whom 
honour  is  due. 

Among  the  seventeen  decimated  victims  of  your  late  companions  in 
suffering  was  a  brother  of  Mrs.  B.'s,  and  it  is  natural  that  we  should  feel 
a  more  than  common  interest  in  the  events  you  have  related.  In  all  my 
reflections  upon  that  most  atrocious  act  of  an  atrocious  tyrant,  to  save 
whose  life,  during  the  great  excitement  at  Velasco  in  1836,  my  own  was 
imminently  jeoparded,  I  have  not  been  able  to  divest  my  mind  of  a  suspi- 
cion that  General  Houston  is  and  will  be  held,  by  a  heart-searching  God, 
morally  guilty  of  that  most  abominable  massacre.  His  gratuitous,  uncall- 
ed for,  and  extraordinary  communication  to  Santa  Anna,  through  the 
agency  of  the  British  minister,  officially  denounced  you  and  your  com- 
panions in  arms  as  without  the  pale  of  nationality,  and,  consequently,  as 
outlawed  brigands,  and  liable  to  be  dealt  with  as  such.  There  certainly 
was  no  political  necessity  for  that  pragmatic,  and,  if  not  designed  for  some 
wicked  purpose  connected  with  the  destiny  of  you  unfortunate  prisoners, 
most  silly  and  useless  communication.  It  is  well  known  that  by  far  the 
major  part  of  Colonel  Fisher's  command  were  the  political  opponents  of 
the  wily  demagogue,  and  that  some  of  them  were  the  objects  of  his  spe- 
cial personal  enmity ;  and  those  who  know  General  Houston  as  well  as 
you  and  I  do,  know  that  he  never  forgave  an  enemy  or  sustained  a  pro- 
fessed friendship  beyond  his  own  interest  or  convenience.  His  utter  des- 
titution of  moral  principle,  and,  signally,  his  habitual  and  entire  disregard 
of  the  truth,  render  it  no  breach  of  charity  to  suspect  him,  on  slighter  ev- 
idence than  is  furnished  in  this  instance,  of  an  extreme  of  baseness. 

I  speak  advisedly,  and,  I  trust,  without  an  undue  feeling  of  personal  hos- 
tility. Political  feelings  I  have  long  since  discarded  as  far  as  is  consist- 
ent with  the  duties  we  all  owe  to  the  society  we  live  in. 

I  beg  you  will  not  long  withhold  the  product  of  your  interesting  labours 
from  the  public.  Give  us  "  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but 
the  truth,"  and  let  venal  critics  and  rewarded  editors,  sometime  bedeck- 

3  a 


482  APPENDIX    NO.   VIII. 

ed  with  the  ermine,  gnaw  upon  it  until  their  venom  fails  or  their  rewards 
cease.     Very  respectfully,  your  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

David  G.  Burnet. 

Austin,  January  10th,  1845. 
Dear  General, —  ....  Since  the  release  of  our  countrymen,  prisoners 
in  Mexico,  I  hope  there  will  be  nothing  to  divert  your  mind  from  the  com- 
pletion of  the  work  in  which  I  found  you  engaged  last  spring — I  mean 
the  journal  of  your  Mier  expedition,  and  the  events  subsequent  to  it.  I 
have  been  looking  for  some  time  for  its  announcement  as  being  ready  for 
the  press.  That  it  will  lose  any  portion  of  its  interest  by  time  I  have  no 
fear,  but  still,  to  cause  it  to  be  generally  read  and  more  anxiously  sought 
after,  the  incidents  which  it  relates  must  not  become  stale  on  the  public 
mind Your  friend  and  servant,  James  Webb. 


No.  VIII. 

The  following  letter  from  her  Britannic  majesty's  charge  d'affaires, 
Captain  Charles  Elliott,  to  Hon.  Anson  Jones,  secretary  of  state  of  the 
Republic  of  Texas,  will  speak  for  itself.  That  both  the  President  and 
secretary  of  state  made  these  assurances  to  Captain  Elliott  they  did  not 
deny ;  but  the  secretary  in  answer  says,  "  Whatever  has  been  done,  there- 
fore, in  relation  to  this  subject,  has  been  in  obedience  to  the  requirements  of 
their  acts"  (the  Congress). 

Galveston,  March  22d,  1844. 
To  the  Honourable  Anson  Jones,  &c,  &c.  ) 
Washington,  on  the  Brazos.  ) 

The  undersigned,  her  Britannic  majesty's  charge  de  affaires  to  the  Re- 
public of  Texas,  has  lately  had  the  honour  to  acquaint  Mr.  Jones  that  her 
majesty's  government  was  engaged  in  continued  efforts  to  induce  the  gov- 
ernment of  Mexico  to  acknowledge  the  independence  of  Texas  ;  and  he 
has  now  the  gratification  to  add  that  renewed  communications  have  taken 
place  between  the  governments  of  her  majesty  and  that  of  the  King  of  the 
French,  and  that  his  majesty  has  expressed  his  concurrence  in  the  pur- 
poses of  the  queen,  and  signified  his  pleasure  to  command  the  French 
minister  at  Mexico  to  join  his  continued  friendly  assistance  to  that  of  her 
majesty's  representative. 

But,  adverting  to  the  proposals  of  the  government  of  the  United  States 
respecting  annexation,  to  the  recent  mission  of  distinguished  citizens  of 
Texas  to  Washington  on  the  Potomac,  and  to  the  impression  so  general 


APPENDIX    NO.    VIII.  483 

in  Texas  that  negotiations  having  that  object  in  view  are  either  in  prog- 
ress or  in  contemplation,  the  undersigned  finds  it  his  duty  to  express 
the  hope  that  the  government  of  Texas  will  furnish  him  with  explanations 
on  the  subject  for  transmission  to  her  majesty's  government.  He  is  sure 
that  they  will  be  made  in  that  spirit  of  frank  and  friendly  unreserve  which 
has  always  characterized  the  intercourse  of  the  two  governments. 

It  must  be  unnecessary  to  say  that  the  undersigned  is  perfectly  aware 
of  the  President's  personal  opinions  on  this  subject,  and  he  has  not  fail- 
ed, agreeably  to  the  President's  wish,  to  communicate  to  her  majesty's 
government  his  excellency's  determination  to  sustain  the  independence 
of  the  Republic,  and  his  excellency's  confident  hope  that  the  people  would 
uphold  him  in  that  course.  Indeed,  referring  to  the  conferences  which 
the  undersigned  had  the  honour  to  have  with  the  President  and  Mr.  Jones 
at  Galveston  during  last  autumn,  he  can  suppose  that  the  mission  to 
Washington  of  the  gentlemen  in  question  has  been  directed  by  a  wise 
desire  to  avoid  any  cause  of  offence  or  irritation  to  the  government  of  the 
United  States,  and  to  explain  with  frankness  that  the  government  of  Tex- 
as could  not  entertain  the  subject  at  all,  even  if  all  other  obstacles  were 
removed,  after  the  former  rejection  of  such  an  arrangement  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  and  wholly  without  reason,  to  know  that  the  Senate  of  the 
United  States  would  ratify  now  or  in  future. 

The  Congress  of  Texas,  however,  has  met  and  separated  since  the 
date  of  the  communications  to  her  majesty's  government  to  which  the 
undersigned  has  referred,  and  the  President  will  feel  with  force  that  it 
is  just  and  necessary,  in  the  present  appearance  of  circumstances,  that 
there  should  be  no  room  for  the  least  uncertainty  on  the  part  of  the  gov- 
ernments engaged  in  the  behalf  of  Texas  at  Mexico  ;  for  it  is  not  to  be 
supposed  that  they  could  continue  to  press  the  government  of  Mexico  to 
settle  upon  one  basis  while  there  was  any  reason  to  surmise  that  nego- 
tiations were  either  in  actual  existence  or  in  contemplation  proposing  a 
combination  of  a  totally  different  nature.  It  is  manifest,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  a  distinct  disavowal  on  the  part  of  the  government  of  Texas 
of  any  intention  to  consent  to  such  a  scheme,  either  now  or  perspective- 
ly,  could  not  fail  to  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  ministers  of  their  majes- 
ties, the  Queen  and  the  King  of  the  French,  at  Mexico. 

Confiding  in  the  steadfastness  of  the  people  of  Texas  to  the  pledges 
in  the  fundamental  acts  of  their  national  existence,  several  of  the  great 
powers  have  acknowledged  the  independence  of  this  Republic,  and  en- 
tered into  treaties  with  it.  While  that  confidence  subsists,  it  may  be  de- 
pended upon  that  the  government  of  her  majesty  will  never  relax  in  its 
friendly  efforts  to  induce  the  government  of  Mexico  to  adjust  on  the  pol- 
icy so  forcibly  pressed  on  the  attention  of  her  majesty's  government  by 


484  APPENDIX    NO.  IX. 

the  government  of  Texas,  not  adopted  without  mature  deliberation  by 
her  majesty's  government,  and  in  their  judgment  equally  necessary  for 
the  security  of  Mexico,  and  the  strength  and  prosperity  of  Texas. 

The  undersigned  takes  this  occasion  to  renew  to  Mr.  Jones  the  expres- 
sion of  the  sentiments  of  regard  and  distinguished  consideration  with 
which  he  has  the  honour  to  remain  his  faithful  and  most  obedient  servant, 
(Signed),  Charles  Elliott. 


No.  IX. 

The  following  extracts  from  my  journal  in  1836,  a  part  of  which  had 
been  copied  into  "  General  Foote's  History  of  Texas,"  will  explain  Santa 
Anna's  unforgiving  malignity  towards  myself : 

"June  1,  1836. — Arrived  at  Velasco  on  board  the  steamer  Ocean,  in 
company  with  the  schooner  Pennsylvania  and  230  of  my  brigade,  having 
ordered  the  remainder,  under  Major  T.  W.  Ward,  to  Labacca  Bay.  Upon 
my  arrival,  I  found  a  large  number  of  the  citizens  of  the  country  in  great  ex- 
citement about  Santa  Anna's  being  sent  home  to  Mexico,  he  being  at  that 
time  on  board  the  '  Invincible^  in  the  offing,  ready  to  sail.  President  Burnet 
had  sent  him  on  board  said  vessel  to  carry  out  a  treaty  in  good  faith,  which 
General  Samuel  Houston  had  promised  upon  the  battle-field  of  San  Jacinto. 
Still  the  people  of  the  country  believed  him  (Santa  Anna)  faithless,  and 
clamoured  violently  against  his  sailing.  Denunciations  and  violent  threats 
were  issued  both  against  the  President  and  all  who  should  aid  or  abet  his 
sailing.  Public  meetings  were  held,  and  violent  speeches  made  against 
the  measure.  In  this  state  of  things,  President  Burnet  addressed  me  a 
note,  requesting  an  interview,  and  asking  my  opinion  in  this  emergency. 
I  told  him  that,  as  to  any  violence  being  offered  to  him  or  his  cabinet,  I 
pledged  my  honour  to  shield  him  and  them  with  my  life  ;  but  that  I  was 
of  opinion  that,  in  accordance  with  the  overwhelming  public  will  of  the 
citizens  of  the  country,  he  should  remand  the  prisoner  ashore,  and  await 
that  public  will  to  determine  his  fate.  The  President  promptly  replied 
that  he  would  do  so. 

"  Accordingly,  the  next  day,  he  issued  an  order  to  Captain  Jeremiah 
Brown,  of  the  Invincible,  to  bring  the  prisoner  on  shore.  Santa  Anna  re- 
turned for  answer  that  he  would  never  leave  that  vessel  alive.  A  sec- 
ond order  was  issued,  and  a  similar  reply  provoked.  The  President  then 
nominated  a  committee,  composed  of  Colonel  B.  F.  Smith,  Baily  Harde- 
man, and  Generals  Hunt  and  Henderson,  to  visit  the  Invincible,  and 
bring  him  ashore.  The  first-named  gentleman  refusing  to  act,  the  re- 
mainder of  the  committee  called  upon  me,  as  the  head  military  officer  at 


APPENDIX    NO.    IX.  485 

the  post,  to  accompany  them,  and  bring  the  prisoner  off,  according  to  the 
President's  wish. 

"  Three  o'clock,  P.M. — We  arrived  on  board  the  Invincible,  where  we 
found  the  prisoner  in  a  state  of  extreme  agitation,  lying  in  his  berth  upon 
his  back,  alternately  raving  like  a  madman  and  crying  like  a  child  ;  now 
denying  that  he  had  any  agency  in  the  massacre  at  Goliad  ;  anon,  threat- 
ening to  take  away  his  own  life  sooner  than  go  ashore,  to  be  delivered  up 
to  what  he  called  the  new  army  from  the  United  States,  which  he  believed 
to  be  bent  on  his  destruction.  The  prisoner  continued  to  act  this  strange 
part  for  about  two  hours  ;  stating,  meanwhile,  that  he  had  taken  largely 
of  opium,  and  would  soon  die.  I  assured  him  that,  if  he  could  rely  upon 
the  word  of  an  American  officer,  he  might  consider  me  as  pledged  that 
there  was  not  a  soldier  under  my  command  who  would  even  do  him  in- 
sult while  under  my  protection.  This  declaration  had  no  visible  effect  in 
dissipating  the  uneasiness  of  the  prisoner  ;  and  his  aid-de-camp,  Colonel 
Almonte,  finally  declared  to  us  that  all  assurances  to  him,  in  his  existing 
condition,  would  be  useless,  as  his  mind  was  entirely  under  the  control 
of  an  overwhelming  dread  of  popular  phrensy ;  that  he,  Colonel  Almonte, 
knew  the  American  character  well  enough  to  have  full  confidence  in  the 
assurances  which  I  had  given.  All  this  time  the  prisoner  continued  lying 
upon  his  back  in  his  berth,  and  his  respiration  seemed  to  me  exceedingly 
difficult.  After  waiting  some  minutes  longer,  I  called  the  surgeon  of  the 
Invincible,  and  requested  him  to  feel  the  prisoner's  pulse,  and  report  his 
true  situation.  He  complied  with  my  request,  and  reported  his  pulse  to 
be  perfectly  healthy  in  its  vibrations,  when  I  again  intimated  to  the  pris- 
oner the  necessity  of  going  ashore.  He  begged  twenty  minutes'  longer 
respite  ;  upon  which,  I  announced  to  the  captain  that  it  would  be  neces- 
sary to  send  forward  his  master-of-arms,  and  have  him  ironed  without 
delay.  When  the  irons  were  brought  within  his  view,  the  prisoner  im- 
mediately jumped  up,  adjusted  his  collar,  put  on  his  hat,  and  stated  his 
readiness  to  accompany  us.  Upon  getting  on  deck,  he  saw  a  sentinel, 
evinced  much  agitation,  and  presented  his  bosom,  evidently  believing 
that  he  was  about  to  be  put  to  death.  I  took  his  arm,  desired  him  to  be 
composed,  and  conducted  him  to  the  captain's  gig-boat,  into  which  we 
descended,  in  company  with  Mr.  Hardeman,  Colonel  Almonte,  and  Cap- 
tain Brown,  and  rowed  for  the  shore  ;  the  other  boat  bringing  the  balance 
of  the  committee,  and  Santa  Anna's  private  secretary.  On  reaching  the 
mouth  of  the  Brasos  River,  Santa  Anna  took  fresh  alarm  at  a  body  of 
Texian  soldiers  and  citizens  whom  he  saw  collected  upon  the  beach  on 
the  Velasco  side,  and  threatened  to  drown  himself  if  the  boat  was  not 
pulled  over  to  the  western  bank.  I  explained  to  him  that  the  crowd  had 
been  drawn  together  by  curiosity  alone,  and  intended  no  violence  ;  and 


486  APPENDIX    NO.    IX. 

farther  suggested  that,  if  he  was  ambitious  of  fully  acting  the  character 
of  Napoleon  the  Second  (so  he  styled  himself  up  to  his  defeat),  he  could  do 
so  by  taking  the  Texian  flag,  which  he  would  find  in  the  stern  of  the 
boat,  and  calmly  wave  it  in  view  of  the  assembly,  in  token  of  his  respect 
for  the  cause  which  they  were  pledged  to  maintain.  His  countenance 
brightened  at  the  suggestion,  and  he  accordingly  took  the  flag.  So  soon 
as  the  boat  arrived  within  about  ten  paces  of  the  shore,  I  announced  to 
him  that  then  was  the  time  to  wave  the  flag,  rising  myself  at  the  same 
time,  and  giving  the  word  to  the  crowd,  '  Three  times  three  V  when  the 
whole  company  cheered,  while  the  prisoner  attempted  tremulously  to 
wave  it,  in  which  he  had  to  be  assisted  by  Captain  Brown,  so  physically 
unnerved  was  he  for  the  task.  We  continued  our  course  up  the  river, 
passing  the  schooner  Pennsylvania  and  steamer  Ocean,  from  both  of 
which  vessels  we  were  cheered.  Landing  at  Quintana,  upon  the  western 
bank,  we  met  President  Burnet,  and  surrendered  the  prisoner  to  him. 
The  President  turned  to  me  and  said,  '  General  Green,  I  deliver  the 
prisoner  over  to  your  charge,  and  shall  hold  you  responsible  for  his  safe 
keeping.'  From  being  the  most  frightened  human  being  I  ever  saw,  the 
prisoner  at  once  regained  confidence  and  appeared  cheerful.  The  truth 
of  my  promises  had  been  demonstrated  by  taking  him  safely  through  a 
crowd  of  citizens  and  soldiers,  whom  he  thought  bent  upon  his  blood. 

"  It  was  now  near  night,  and  having  ordered  my  cabin  on  board  the 
steamer  to  be  put  in  readiness  for  the  reception  of  the  prisoner,  we  con- 
tinued to  walk  until  our  supper  was  announced.  During  this  walk,  I  was 
struck  with  the  address  both  of  the  prisoner  and  his  interpreter,  Colonel 
Almonte,  in  endeavouring  to  impress  upon  me  the  certainty  of  his  carry- 
ing out  the  treaty,  and  the  sooner  he  should  reach  Mexico,  the  more 
power  he  would  have  in  so  doing.  I  took  the  ground  that  the  people  of 
Texas  were  not  convinced  of  that  fact ;  and  as  for  myself,  that  it  was 
childish  to  tell  me  that  there  was  anything  either  legally  or  morally  bind- 
ing upon  the  prisoner  to  carry  out  a  promise  made  by  him  while  in  duress. 

"  At  half  past  six  our  supper  was  served.  It  was  as  good  as  money  could 
have  purchased  at  the  time,  and  a  good  one  for  hungry  men.  It  is  true 
that  it  was  not  served  in  as  bright  metal,  and  under  as  many  covers  as 
my  guest  was  used  to  in  the  palace  of  the  Montezumas,  but,  considering 
his  late  devastations  in  Texas,  we  were  lucky  in  having  so  good  a  one. 
It  consisted  of  an  abundance  of  good  beefsteaks  and  gravy,  served  in  a 
bright  tin  pan,  with  good  bread,  and,  what  was  remarkable  for  this  stage 
of  our  Revolution,  a  knife  and  fork  each.  The  tin  pan  was  set  upon  a 
narrow  bench,  and  my  august  guest  and  myself  straddled  said  bench — 
inward  face ! — with  our  knees  touching,  we  cutting,  sopping,  and  eating 
a  bountiful  meal  out  of  said  tin  pan  ! 


APPENDIX    NO.    IX.  487 

"  Colonel  Almonte  and  the  private  secretary  of  the  prisoner  stood  by 
in  attendance  upon  him,  while  my  orderly  served  each  of  us  a  pint  of 
coffee  in  tin  cups :  the  said  cups,  though  sufficiently  bright  inside,  were 
quite  sooty  upon  the  outside.  Holding  up  my  cup,  I  pleasantly  remarked  to 
Santa  Anna,  that,  when  I  visited  Mexico,  I  should  expect  him  to  give  me 
coffee  in  brighter  metal.  Placing  his  hand  upon  his  heart,  in  the  most 
Christian  earnestness  he  replied,  '  Ah !  yes,  my  dear  general,  I  do  long 
for  this  unfortunate  war  to  be  over,  and  then  I  want  to  see  you  in  Mexico, 
where  I  can  reciprocate  your  kindness.'* 

"  In  a  few  days  I  was  ordered,  with  what  forces  I  had  at  Velasco,  up 
the  Brasos  to  repel  an  Indian  incursion,  and  turned  the  prisoner  over  to 
the  President. 

"  On  the  day  after  I  marched  from  Velasco,  Santa  Anna  made  a  protest 
to  President  Burnet  against  his  detention  as  prisoner,  &c,  in  which  much 
of  his  unjust  spite  seemed  levelled  at  me.  He  says,  '  I  repeat  that  I 
protest  against  the  President  and  cabinet's  condescension  in  issuing  their 
orders  for  that  measure'  (bringing  him  ashore),  '  thereby  making  a  show 
of  me  before  those  men,  as  in  former  times  was  done  with  the  chiefs  of 
conquered  nations,  considering  them  as  trophies  of  their  victories  :  with 
this  difference,  that  in  my  case  a  solemn  treaty  already  existed.'  It  is 
hardly  necessary  for  me  to  say  that  President  Burnet's  answer  to  said 
protest  was  triumphant." 

*  While  a  prisoner  in  Mexico,  I  related  this  anecdote  to  a  Mexican  officer,  and  jocularly 
requested  him  to  say  to  the  dictator,  his  master,  "  that  I  had  visited  Mexico,  though  not  in 
the  manner  we  spoke  of  at  Velasco  in  1836."  The  only  answer  I  ever  received  was  twenty 
pounds  of  iron,  and  an  order  to  perform  menial  labour.  Having  no  power  to  resist  the  irons. 
I  promptly  replied  that  I  would  die  under  any  tortures  he  might  choose  to  inflict  upon  me 
sooner  than  submit  to  the  latter  degradation.  The  order  was  several  times  repeated,  ac- 
companied with  severe  threats,  and  my  countrymen  will  bear  me  witness  that  it  was  as 
often  resisted  with  the  most  open  contempt. 

THE   END. 


R01117  107E7 


